**GENERAL RACE/RACISM**
# **Racism Misconceptions**

### **1. "How does institutional racism explain disparities?"**

To understand how institutional racism explains disparities, it must first be understood that institutional racism is situated within a conceptual framework which acknowledges the role of racialisation. There are both conceptual and political advantages to adopting this conceptualisation. Analytically, according to Rattansi 2005, racialisation provides a multi-layered and multi-dimensional frame. It can encapsulate statements which explicitly denigrate or assume the inferiority of racialised groups as well as the more implicit common sense understandings which exist within institutions. Its dynamic, as opposed to static nature, allows the intersections of race with class, gender, sexuality and nation to be incorporated into any empirical investigation, as (Rattansi, [2005](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-social-policy/article/institutional-racism-and-ethnic-inequalities-an-expanded-multilevel-framework/CC0299D0168307C7F6ED1FD891D74245%23ref68): 290) makes clear. Basically, in this regard, it accommodates intersectional understandings which recognise the significance of seeing individuals as multiply positioned, with each identity (race/ethnicity, gender or class) irreducible to a discrete category or experience. These multiple axes of differentiation and interacting levels of disadvantage and discrimination produce complex social relations (Crenshaw, [1993](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-social-policy/article/institutional-racism-and-ethnic-inequalities-an-expanded-multilevel-framework/CC0299D0168307C7F6ED1FD891D74245%23ref17); [Brah, Phoenix, Taylor, Gillborn and Ladson-Billings 2009](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-social-policy/article/institutional-racism-and-ethnic-inequalities-an-expanded-multilevel-framework/CC0299D0168307C7F6ED1FD891D74245%23ref10)). Analytically, such an approach can also better appreciate internal differentiation which avoids essentializing experience and recognises its historically and spatially contingent nature. This multilevel framework of racialisation at micro, meso, and macro levels (which includes institutional racialisation) can be applied to explain ethnic inequalities.

### **2. "There are only individuals racists, not the system."**

It’s kind of a reductive view to just say “oh well if individual ppl are racist against a certain group of ppl, is the system racist?'' I mean systems are made of individuals, those individuals have implicit biases against certain groups of people then it’s kinda obvious that those people would have a direct link to a disproportionate outcome between two races. Before we point out specific people, we need to address the racist cultures, racist laws, and racist policies that produce racist individuals. There are four dimensions of racism: internalized, which speaks to your beliefs; interpersonal, which speaks to your behavior; institutional, which speaks to your organizational culture, and structural, which speaks to society. You can't reduce these problems to individuals because you otherwise ignore the complexities of race; you obscure the four dimensions of racism.

### **3. "But racism has to be intentional!"**

The concept of institutional racism emphasizes non-intentionality and normal institutional procedures. 'Institutional racism is in its most profound instances, covert, resulting from acts of indifference, omission and refusal to challenge the status quo' (Spears, 1978: 29). Distinctions need to be made between (a) those activities which are clearly racialist and supported by racist justifications, and (b) those activities which are in origin non-racialist and are justified by non-racist ideologies and (c) those activities which are non-racialist but are based upon unconscious or unadmitted racist justifications. What is important is that we keep an open mind about the relationship between racist intent, racial expression in practices and racial effect, i.e. forms of inequality. (a) Racist belief need not necessarily result in racially discriminatory practices and racial inequalities. (b) Racially discriminatory practices need not be justified in racist terms in order to produce unequal outcomes. (c) Racially discriminatory practices may continue after their racist justifications have been abandoned. (d) Racial inequality may be the result of other factors than intentional discrimination. Unless these different scenarios are accepted, then it is suggested that policies to alter racially discriminatory practices and institutional processes will either fail because they are based on a false set of assumptions or arouse an unnecessary backlash when people deny both their racist intents or their unconscious racism! If individuals are racist because of their uncritical participation in racist institutions, then this is the result of their actions rather than their intentions. It doesn’t matter the intent of individuals, it doesn’t matter whether individuals are racist or not, what matters is the outcome. If the system leads to an outcome that is disproportionate between two people (even when we are accounting for variables other than race) we can conclude that there is some barrier preventing one race from being successful over another race. And in this case it’s white people being more successful than black people when it comes to employment, sentencing, and in many other areas. In fact, accordingly a statistical approach geared toward testing whether race caused someone to behave differently has no necessary relation to the core elements in a disparate impact claim. As the Supreme Court noted in Watson v. Fort Worth Bank & Trust, “[t]he factual issues and the character of the evidence are inevitably somewhat different when the plaintiff is exempted from the need to prove intentional discrimination.” Additionally, [McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McDonnell_Douglas_Corp._v._Green), 411 U.S. 792 (1973) showed that discriminatory intent can be shown through indirect or circumstantial evidence.

### **4. "I don’t see color/a color-blind society will fix racism."**

Although this assertion sounds intuitively plausible, the reality is that color-blind policies often put racial minorities at a disadvantage. For instance, all else being equal, color-blind seniority systems tend to protect White workers against job layoffs, because senior employees are usually White. Likewise, color-blind college admissions favor White students because of their earlier educational advantages. Unless pre-existing inequities are corrected or otherwise taken into account, color-blind policies do not correct racial injustice—they reinforce it. [https://www.cornellpress.cornell.edu/book/9780801426223/racism-and-justice/](https://www.cornellpress.cornell.edu/book/9780801426223/racism-and-justice/)

In an ideal society, we would get to live colorblind, in which race has no meaning or impact whatsoever. However, we do not live in a color blind society so we should not act like race is insignificant. Ignoring the problems in our society does not make them automatically go away; rather, it allows these problems to fester while we do nothing about it. This is particularly the case for implicit bias, which will still exist even if we deny that it does.

Taking on a fully colorblind approach also neglects the role that racist policies and history have had in shaping our present. We are not detached from our past, but rather we are the product of it. As a result of past discrimination, [we see communities and subdivisions divided up by race](https://www.forbes.com/sites/rakeenmabud/2019/12/04/history-and-housing-discrimination-why-neighborhoods-in-the-united-states-are-still-so-segregated/) (an artifact of past segregation), [inequalities in wealth and opportunity](https://oprhc.org/2016/08/how-segregation-creates-chronic-unemployment-poverty-traps-and-crime/) (a lasting result of discrimination past and present, among other things), and so on. Implementing a colorblind agenda RIGHT NOW would obviously not address the consequences of past racism, instead opting to ignore those consequences and shout "racism!" at anyone who actually does try to address those consequences.

### **5. NBA Comparison/"The NBA/NFL is dominated by black players who have made fortunes in the sport"

First of all, the NBA literally used to [block black players](https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/kidspost/in-nbas-early-years-black-players-werent-welcome/2017/02/15/664aa92e-f1fc-11e6-b9c9-e83fce42fb61_story.html) in its early years. This is not a valid comparison because there's no point of human treatment and racism has to have a subject and an object in which both are humans/human institutions. The NBA and NFL are just demographics. A demographic in and of itself can't be racist. The point of action where someone either interacts with an institution or another human being, that's when it's racist. There's not enough information to conclude whether the NBA or NFL is racist. Who’s hired in the NBA and NFL comes down to beating the clock, scoring, and yardage. Those three things have no opinions nor feelings.

### **6. Critiques on Thomas Sowell’s “Disparity ≠ Discrimination”**

- The claim “disparity ≠ discrimination” is just a slogan, not a conclusion derived from dispassionate and comprehensive empirical research and reflection. Disparities can be produced by any number of causes, which certainly include –but are by no means limited to– discrimination. The fact that some or even many disparities are not caused by discrimination does not prove that discrimination can never be inferred, or even that it usually can’t. All it proves is that discrimination cannot be inferred from disparities 100% of the time, which is obviously true anyway. The truth is that discrimination or bias is usually not inferable from a single statistic standing alone. A single statistic is a snapshot, showing one view of a situation from one angle. To show causation for an inequality, something more is needed. That can come from a comprehensive battery of statistics, showing the situation from many different views and many different angles. Or it can come from nonstatistical evidence such as narratives of discrimination. A multilayered examination like this is considered probative not only among social scientists and statisticians, but also in law.
  - [https://dawsonvosburg.medium.com/whats-wrong-with-thomas-sowell-464baab5978e](https://dawsonvosburg.medium.com/whats-wrong-with-thomas-sowell-464baab5978e)
    - “Sowell is correct that intentional racial discrimination (according to Sowell’s classification, Discrimination 1b and 2) at a given juncture — say, racial discrimination by an employer — cannot fully explain Black-White racial disparities in economic outcomes. It does not follow, however, that therefore the remaining racial disparity not explained by acute racial discrimination is not caused by racism in society. Sowell concludes that, for instance, employers and realtors and bankers will make choices about hiring or real estate or loans based on the relevant qualities the individual brings to the table, such as education, credit scores, criminal or eviction history, and so on (this is what he calls Discrimination 1a). People have differences in the quantity and quality of these they can bring to the table, and thus it is perfectly reasonable to find inequalities in economic outcomes. What is not answered by this, however, is why these inequalities would be unevenly distributed by race. It’s certainly not a realtor’s fault that there is a Black-White disparity in credit score, but that difference is not a natural fact of the universe. I and most other social scientists believe that there is inherited inequality from the entire history of American social life that at least in part accounts for why the distribution of these sorts of things are unequal by race. The literature on inherited racial inequalities in sociology, economics, and history is simply massive and cannot be hand-waved away. As it stands, Sowell’s argument on this point is hopelessly endogenous.”
  - [https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3532411](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3532411)
    - “A more interesting question is what drives these disparities. Several times, Sowell compares the uneven distribution of favorable outcomes in the population to the uneven distribution of phenomena like tornadoes — implying that the status quo may simply reflect the natural order of things. He begins the book with a lengthy discussion of how success typically requires many prerequisites (e.g. intelligence, effort, living in a place with good institutions), and the absence of any one can mean failure. This, he claims, means it should not be surprising that success is not evenly distributed. Even if the underlying prerequisites are randomly distributed, the distribution of who is successful will be highly skewed, with only a small share of people having all the prerequisites necessary for success. What Sowell does not discuss is that random distribution of the prerequisites would not produce outcomes that are correlated with traits such as race. The fact that black residents of the U.S. suffer far worse outcomes than white residents implies that the probabilities that these various prerequisites are satisfied vary by race. Some have argued that this is due to differences in genetic makeup; to his credit, Sowell does not make this argument, and in fact seeks to provide an alternative explanation. But if outcomes are correlated with race then this necessarily implies that underlying opportunities or circumstances must be distributed in a way that is correlated with race. Sowell argues that this is not necessarily due to malice, and that is certainly true. But such outcomes also cannot simply be due to chance. This position – that racial disparities are due to random chance – is odd in part because it seems to blatantly ignore societal realities, and also because it does not seem necessary for the arguments that follow. While noting repeatedly that he is not ruling out Discrimination 1b (statistical discrimination in which they match unobservable characteristics and observable race to make a decision) and 2 (outright being racist based on one’s race), Sowell spends much of the book arguing that most existing disparities are due to Discrimination 1a — that is, accurate sorting of applicants by employers, banks, and so on. Disparities based on accurate sorting on traits like educational attainment can be due to unequal opportunity — say, less access to good schools as a child. Differences in opportunity are not an employer’s fault or responsibility, but are also not natural phenomena. They should direct us to address those childhood disparities as the way to reduce adult disparities. Ignoring this implication serves only to deny our power to change the status quo.”
    - “However, disparities arising from such decisions (discrimination 1a, making decisions based on qualities) have what lawyers would refer to as a ‘disparate impact’ on disadvantaged groups, and this can be used as evidence of discrimination in legal settings.)”

- [https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/JAAHv91n4p459](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/JAAHv91n4p459)

### **7. "Show me a law or policy that is racist in intent."**

The problem with this argument is that it assumes “in order for systemic racism to exist then it must be codified within the law” when in reality systemic racism exists in a variety of social contexts and the law because systemic racism is de facto, not de jure. The laws don’t reference race because they don’t need to. The basic structural layout of the US means that Black populations can be disproportionately harmed by a theoretically and ostensibly race neutral measure.

A bit off-topic but here’s a fun gotcha for conservatives/republicans when it comes to laws with racist intent: many republicans argue both that systemic racism ended in the 60s (with the civil rights acts) and that the [1994 crime bill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Violent_Crime_Control_and_Law_Enforcement_Act) (which Joe Biden contributed significantly to) was racist and had a racist impact (because Joe Biden is racist). The gotcha comes when you ask them if the crime bill was racist, answering yes suggests that racist legislation was implemented in 1994, much more recently than the 60s. That starts to open questions about what other laws we might be forgetting about which have come about since the 60s.

### **8. "White privilege isn’t real, American privilege is the REAL privilege."**

Invoking American privilege, seems to undermine the larger argument because it actively acknowledges that a person can have a level of privilege as a result of arbitrary factors that you yourself might not be in control of. In this case it’s nationality but by that logic why not then race? Secondarily, when you look at the data, it’s really hard to make a case that there isn’t a level of privilege afforded to white Americans.

### **9. "Black privilege is real."**

Even if this were true, this undermines the argument because it actively acknowledges that a black person can have a level of privilege as a result of arbitrary factors that they might not be in control of. In this case it’s being black but by that logic why not then being white? Secondarily, when you look at the data, it’s really hard to make a case that there isn’t a level of privilege afforded to white Americans.

### **10. "Get over slavery because it happened in the past!"**

The psychic hold of slavery is not a set of mental manacles that hold us back from imagining a postracist America. The psychic hold of slavery is understood as a tool, helping us get a grip on the systemic racial inequalities and restricted liberties that persist in the present day.

### **11. "Why does everything have to be about race?"**

If you have such a problem about hearing race 24/7, take it up with the founders of this country and their descendants who benefit from it.

# **Subconscious Bias**
**Even disregarding forms of overt racism, subconscious bias has been demonstrated by a number of studies and undoubtedly affects others forms of discrimination against black people. Neuroscience studies have shown that different regions of the brain are activated in conscious versus unconscious processing, suggesting that unconscious processes are distinct mental activities. Implicit biases are more likely to drive behavior under conditions of ambiguity, high time pressures and cognitive loads, or inattentiveness to the task.**

- [Birdsong 17](https://ir.ua.edu/bitstream/handle/123456789/3276/file_1.pdf)
  - Photos of capital inmates shown to entry-level criminal justice students for them to evaluate the trustworthiness of the faces
  - **Students rated the light skin pictures as more trustworthy when they preceded dark skin pictures**
  - Most study participants (79.9%) were white, but the study predicted that this wasn’t a major factor - “*When controlling for race, no statistically significant result was found. This suggests that each race, White and non-White, were consistent in their rating outcomes. **Prior research has found similar results**, where **Whites and light-skinned Blacks are likely to share similar attitudes towards darker-skinned Blacks***”

- [APA 14](https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2014/03/black-boys-older)
  - Students and Police officers participated in tests to determine levels of bias
  - Black boys as young as 10 may not be viewed in the same light of childhood innocence as their white peers, but are instead more likely to be mistaken as older, be perceived as guilty and face police violence if accused of a crime
  - Researchers reviewed police officers’ personnel records to determine use of force while on duty and found that those who dehumanized blacks were more likely to have used force against a black child in custody than officers who did not dehumanize blacks. The study described use of force as takedown or wrist lock; kicking or punching; striking with a blunt object; using a police dog, restraints or hobbling; or using tear gas, electric shock or killing

- [APA 17](https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2017/03/black-men-threatening)
  - People have a tendency to perceive black men as larger and more threatening than similarly sized white men
  - We found that these estimates were consistently biased. Participants judged the black men to be larger, stronger and more muscular than the white men, even though they were actually the same size
  - Participants also believed that the black men were more capable of causing harm in a hypothetical altercation and, troublingly, that police would be more justified in using force to subdue them, even if the men were unarmed

- [For Black men, being tall increases threat stereotyping and police stops](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5856523/)
  - Finds that tall young black men are especially likely to receive unjustified attention by law enforcement.
  - The authors furthermore found a "causal link between perceptions of height and perceptions of threat for Black men, particularly for perceivers who endorse stereotypes that Black people are more threatening than White people."

- [Black Neighbors, Higher Crime? The Role of Racial Stereotypes in Evaluations of Neighborhood Crime](https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/pager/files/ajs_quillianpager.pdf)
  - “The percentage young black men in a neighborhood is positively associated with perceptions of the neighborhood crime level, even after controlling for two measures of crime rates and other neighborhood characteristics. This supports the view that stereotypes are influencing perceptions of neighborhood crime levels.”

- [Sommers and Norton, 2011](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1745691611406922)
  - We show that this emerging belief reflects Whites’ view of racism as a zero-sum game, such that decreases in perceived bias against Blacks over the past six decades are associated with increases in perceived bias against Whites—a relationship not observed in Blacks’ perceptions. **Moreover, these changes in Whites’ conceptions of racism are extreme enough that Whites have now come to view anti-White bias as a bigger societal problem than anti-Black bias**

- [Baker, Perry, and White, 2020](https://academic.oup.com/socrel/article/81/3/272/5836966?login=true)
  - Consistent with previous research, Christian nationalism and Islamophobia remained strong and significant predictors of intention to vote for Trump; however, the effect of xenophobia was stronger.
  -  In the penultimate year before Trump’s reelection campaign, **the strongest predictors of supporting Trump, in order of magnitude, were political party, xenophobia, identifying as African American (negative), political ideology, Christian nationalism, and Islamophobia.** 

- [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/10974305_The_Police_Officer's_Dilemma_Using_Ethnicity_to_Disambiguate_Potentially_Threatening_Individuals](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/10974305_The_Police_Officer)

# **Housing/Lending**
**While racial disparities/discrimination have declined in some forms here, it is still persistent in others. Historically, housing discrimination was big against black people, and the effects of such have carried on into the present day.**

- [Housing and Urban Development 12](https://www.huduser.gov/portal/Publications/pdf/HUD-514_HDS2012.pdf)
  - Analyzes “trends in racial and ethnic discrimination in both rental and sales market” since the 1970s
  - “*When well-qualified minority homeseekers contact housing providers to inquire about recently advertised housing units, they generally are just as likely as equally qualified white homeseekers to get an appointment and learn about at least one available housing unit. **However, when differences in treatment occur, white homeseekers are more likely to be favored than minorities. Most important, minority homeseekers are told about and shown fewer homes and apartments than whites***”
  - Black renters who contact agents about recently advertised housing units learn about **11.4 percent fewer available units than equally qualified whites and are shown 4.2 percent fewer units**.
  - Black homebuyers are **2.4 percentage points more likely than equally qualified whites to be denied an in-person appointment.**
  - Black homebuyers who contact agents about recently advertised homes for sale learn about **17.0 percent fewer available homes than equally qualified whites and are shown 17.7 percent fewer homes.**
  - White renters experience more favorable treatment than equally well-qualified blacks in **28.4 percent of inquiries, compared to 19.6 percent in which blacks are favored.** 
    - Consequently, black renters learn about **11.4 percent fewer available units than equally qualified whites (0.20 fewer per inquiry on average) and are shown 4.2 percent fewer units (0.06 fewer per inquiry).**
  - Almost half the time, one tester is told about at least one more unit than his or her partner, with whites 9.0 percentage points more likely than comparable blacks to be told about more available units. Over all tests, blacks learn about 0.2 fewer available units per visit than whites. (Among tests in which the white tester is told about more available units, the difference in the number of units averages 1.68 units; among tests in which the black tester is told about more available units, the difference averages 1.40 units.)
    - This means that, over five in-person visits to rental agents, a black homeseeker would learn about one fewer available unit than a comparable white.
  - One tester is shown more units than the other; in these cases, whites are 2.8 percentage points more likely than blacks to be favored. As a result, whites are shown 0.04 more units than blacks on average. (Among tests in which the white tester is shown more available units, the difference in the number of units shown averages 1.27 units; among tests in which the black tester is shown more available units, the difference averages 1.22 units.)
    - This means that over 25 visits to agents where units are available, a black homeseeker would be shown one fewer available unit than a comparable white.
    - In addition, blacks are shown units with more housing quality problems than equally qualified white homeseekers—0.05 more problem conditions per unit on average.
  - Specifically, white homebuyers experience more favorable treatment than equally well-qualified blacks in 40.7 percent of inquiries, compared with 30.9 percent in which blacks are favored.
    - Consequently, black homebuyers who contact agents about recently advertised homes for sale learn about 17.0 percent fewer available homes than equally qualified whites (0.53 fewer per inquiry on average) and are shown 17.7 percent fewer (0.32 fewer per inquiry).
  - However, in 8 of every 10 tests, more homes are recommended to one tester than the other, and in these cases, whites are 13.4 percentage points more likely than comparable black homebuyers to be favored.
    - These differences mean that on average, whites learn about 0.50 more available homes per test. (Among tests in which the white tester is told about more homes, the difference in the number of homes averages 3.30; among tests in which the black tester is told about more homes, the difference averages 3.11.) This means that for every two visits to a sales agent, a black homebuyer learns about one fewer available home than an equally qualified white homebuyer.

- [Quillian, Lee, & Honoré et al. 20](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12552-019-09276-x)
  - Analyzes “trends in racial and ethnic discrimination in U.S. housing and mortgage lending markets” since the 1970s
  - Finds a **decline in housing discrimination since the 1970s, though such has not vanished completely** - the level of discrimination varies depending on the factor being analyzed
  - **Racial gaps in mortgage cost have not declined at all**, suggesting racism or other racial barriers have not gone away at all for that particular factor
  - Compared to equally qualified white applicants, the probability of receiving a response to an initial inquiry is 8% points lower among blacks.
  - For African Americans after 2005, there remains a gap of 10% or more in the number of units or homes recommended compared to whites.

- [Burd-Sharps & Rasch 15](https://www.aclu.org/files/field_document/discrimlend_final.pdf)
  - Report by the Social Science Research Council and ACLU that goes into the results of various studies on the housing crisis, racial wealth gap, and on the effects and prevalence of discriminatory lending. Some findings referred to in the report:
  - “A [joint report](https://www.huduser.gov/portal//Publications/pdf/treasrpt.pdf) from the US Department of Housing and Urban Development and the US Department of the Treasury found that, as of 2000, “**borrowers in black neighborhoods [were] five times as likely to refinance in the subprime market than borrowers in white neighborhoods,” even when controlling for income.**” and that even “**borrowers in upper-income black neighborhoods were twice as likely as homeowners in low-income white neighborhoods to refinance with a subprime loan.**”
  - A [study](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0003122410380868) analyzing foreclosure actions across the top 100 U.S. metropolitan areas on measures of black, Hispanic, and Asian segregation finds that even when **“controlling for a variety of housing market conditions, including average creditworthiness**” They find that **“black residential dissimilarity and spatial isolation are powerful predictors of foreclosures across U.S. metropolitan areas”**. They also **isolated subprime lending as the causal force in which segregation influences foreclosures by estimating “a two-stage least squares model that confirms the causal effect of black segregation on the number and rate of foreclosures across metropolitan areas.”**
  - A **.1 unit increase in black dissimilarity** is associated with **37 percent more foreclosure actions** and a **34 percent increase in the foreclosure rate.**
  - A **standard deviation increase** in** the **segregation of African Americans increases the number of foreclosures by 15,028 actions and the rate of foreclosures by 1.68 percentage points.**
  - One **standard deviation** in **black segregation leads to a large change in foreclosures (13,842) and the foreclosure rate (1.58 percentage points).**

- [Suffolk 2020](https://www.suffolk.edu/-/media/suffolk/documents/news/2020/law-news/rental_housing_study_july2020.pdf)
  - Finds that Black renters face discrimination when renting compared to similarly situated White renters.
  - Results indicate that White market-rate testers— meaning White testers not using vouchers—were able to arrange to view apartments 80% of the time. Similarly situated Black market-rate testers seeking to view the same apartments were only able to visit the property 48% of the time.

- [Perry 2018](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/2018.11_Brookings-Metro_Devaluation-Assets-Black-Neighborhoods_final.pdf)
  - After controlling for differences in housing quality and various neighborhood characteristics, homes in majority-Black neighborhoods were valued 23% lower than homes in neighborhoods with few or no Black residents.
  - 57% of the white population would need to move to a different neighborhood for the white and Black population to be distributed evenly.

- [Weinberg 2002](https://www.census.gov/prod/2002pubs/censr-3.pdf)
  - Black people remain the most segregated racial group. The dissimilarity-index indices in 1980, 1990 and 2000 are 72.7, 67.8, and 64.0, respectively.

- Since redlining ended 40 years ago, neighborhoods in formerly redlined neighborhoods have earned 52% ($212,000) less in personal wealth generated from property value. [https://www.redfin.com/blog/redlining-real-estate-racial-wealth-gap/](https://www.redfin.com/blog/redlining-real-estate-racial-wealth-gap/)

- In the National Housing Act of 1939, the property appraisal system tied property value and eligibility for government loans to race.
  - [https://www.racepowerofanillusion.org/](https://www.racepowerofanillusion.org/)

- The 1936 Underwriting Manual used by the Federal Housing Administration to guide residential mortgages gave 20% weight to a neighborhood's protection, for example, zoning ordinances, deed restrictions, high speed traffic arteries, from adverse influences, such as infiltration of inharmonious racial groups. Thus, white-majority neighborhoods received the government's highest property value ratings, and whites were eligible for government loans and aid.
  - [https://tind-customer-berkeleylaw.s3.amazonaws.com/482f0b11-8dc1-4c10-828a-7be42097ae86?response-content-disposition=attachment%3B%20filename%2A%3DUTF-8%27%27fulltext.pdf&response-content-type=application%2Fpdf&X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Expires=86400&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAXL7W7Q3XNDXVUP4O%2F20210604%2Feu-west-1%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Date=20210604T014124Z&X-Amz-Signature=eeceae5b893c44534bdaf7766c3cdf8eee8dd7d160edb6ef52aa17a7674921ea](https://tind-customer-berkeleylaw.s3.amazonaws.com/482f0b11-8dc1-4c10-828a-7be42097ae86?response-content-disposition=attachment;%20filename*%3DUTF-8%27%27fulltext.pdf&response-content-type=application/pdf&X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Expires=86400&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAXL7W7Q3XNDXVUP4O/20210604/eu-west-1/s3/aws4_request&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Date=20210604T014124Z&X-Amz-Signature=eeceae5b893c44534bdaf7766c3cdf8eee8dd7d160edb6ef52aa17a7674921ea)

- From the 1930s through the 1960s following the depression, Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal FHA enabled the growth of the whites by providing loan guarantees to banks, which in turn, financed white homeownership and enabled white exodus, and it did not make loans available to Black people.
  - [https://www.jstor.org/stable/3789630?seq=1](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3789630?seq=1)

- White exodus is the phenomenon whereby white people move away from racial-minority suburbs or inner-city neighborhoods to white suburbs and exurbs. The FHA often refused to sell home mortgages for private home purchases to Black people, thus limiting Black mobility out of the inner cities.
  - The “tipping point” of white exodus begins once the proportion of non-whites exceeds the limits of the neighborhood’s tolerance for interracial living, white people move out. Once the population of a housing project becomes more than one-third black, most white residents begin to leave. [http://www.marcoinfussi.it/files/scuola_politica.archivio/Edward-C-Banfield-Politics-Planning-and-the-Public-Interest-1955.](http://www.marcoinfussi.it/files/scuola_politica.archivio/Edward-C-Banfield-Politics-Planning-and-the-Public-Interest-1955.pdf)

- Retail stores also started moving to the suburbs to be closer to the customers and to avoid being robbed.
  - [https://books.google.com/books/about/Growing_Smarter.html?id=NAcmSchlTOYC](https://books.google.com/books/about/Growing_Smarter.html?id=NAcmSchlTOYC)

- Homeowners in one such subdivision, Levittown, L.I., were forbidden to rent or sell to persons "other than members of the Caucasian race"
  - [https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/books/review/richard-rothstein-color-of-law-forgotten-history.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/books/review/richard-rothstein-color-of-law-forgotten-history.html)

- Between 1934 and 1962, less than 2% of government-subsidized housing went to non-white people.
  - [https://www.racepowerofanillusion.org/](https://www.racepowerofanillusion.org/)

- In the Social Security Act of 1935, agricultural workers, servants, most of whom were Black people, were excluded because key white people did not want governmental assistance to change the agrarian system. In the Wagner Act of 1935, "Blacks were blocked by law from challenging the barriers to entry into the newly protected labor unions and securing the right to collective bargaining."
  - [https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/9780822381044-007/html](https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/9780822381044-007/html)

- Historical actions by the Federal Housing Administration still have an impact on people today:
  - [https://www.pbs.org/race/000_About/002_04-background-03-02.htm](https://www.pbs.org/race/000_About/002_04-background-03-02.htm)
  - [https://www.npr.org/2017/05/03/526655831/a-forgotten-history-of-how-the-u-s-government-segregated-america](https://www.npr.org/2017/05/03/526655831/a-forgotten-history-of-how-the-u-s-government-segregated-america)

- Nationally, nearly two-thirds of neighborhoods deemed “hazardous” are inhabited by mostly minority residents, typically black and Latino, researchers found. Cities with more such neighborhoods have significantly greater economic inequality. On the flip side, 91 percent of areas classified as “best” in the 1930s remain middle-to-upper-income today, and 85 percent of them are still predominantly white.
  - [https://ncrc.org/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2018/02/NCRC-Research-HOLC-10.pdf](https://ncrc.org/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2018/02/NCRC-Research-HOLC-10.pdf)

- Due to robberies, black neighborhoods have been left with fewer food stores, but more liquor stores.
  - [https://www.worldcat.org/title/thin-red-line-how-the-poor-still-pay-more/oclc/29426667](https://www.worldcat.org/title/thin-red-line-how-the-poor-still-pay-more/oclc/29426667)

- In 1968, the Fair Housing Act (FHA) was signed into law to eliminate the effects of state-sanctioned racial segregation. But it failed to change the status quo as the United States remained nearly segregated as in the 1960s. A newer discriminating lending practice was subprime lending in the 1990s. Lenders targeted high-interest subprime loans to low-income and minority neighborhoods who might be eligible for fair-interest prime loans. Securitization, mortgage brokers and other non-deposit lenders, and legislative deregulation of the mortgage lending industry all played a role in promoting the subprime lending market.
  - [https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0739456X9000900302](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0739456X9000900302)

- The long-outlawed practice of redlining (in which banks choke off lending to minority communities) recently re-emerged as a concern for federal bank regulators in New York and Connecticut. A settlement with the Justice Dept and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau was the largest in the history of both agencies, topping $33 million in restitution for the practice from New Jersey's largest savings bank. The bank had been accused of steering clear of higher crime neighborhoods and favoring whites in granting loans and mortgages, finding that of the approximately 1900 mortgages made in 2014 only 25 went to Black applicants. The banks' executives denied bias, and the settlement came with adjustments to the banks' business practices. This followed other successful efforts by the federal, state and city officials in 2014 to expand lending programs directed at minorities, and in some cases to force banks to pay penalties for patterns of redlining in Providence, R.I.; St. Louis, Mo.; Milwaukee, WI.; Buffalo and Rochester, N.Y. The Justice Dept also has more active redlining investigations underway, and officials have stated to reporters that "redlining is not a thing of the past". It has evolved into a more politically correct version, where bankers do not talk about denying loans to Black people openly. The justice department officials noted that some banks have quietly institutionalized bias in their operations. They have moved their operations out of minority communities entirely, while others have moved in to fill the void and compete for clients. Such management decisions are not the stated intent, it is left unspoken so that even the bank's other customers are unaware that it is occurring. The effect on minority communities can be profound as home ownership, a prime source of neighborhood stability and economic mobility can affect its vulnerability to blight and disrepair. In the 1960s and 1970s laws were passed banning the practice; its return is far less overt, and while the vast majority of banks operate legally, the practice appears to be more widespread as the investigation revealed a vast disparity in loans approved for Black people vs whites in similar situations.
  - [http://www.americanbanker.com/news/law-regulation/cfpb-doj-stepping-up-interest-in-redlining-cases-1074244-1.html](https://www.americanbanker.com/news/law-regulation/cfpb-doj-stepping-up-interest-in-redlining-cases-1074244-1.html)
  - [https://www.latimes.com/opinion/story/2020-07-17/banks-pandemic-small-business-racism](https://www.latimes.com/opinion/story/2020-07-17/banks-pandemic-small-business-racism)
  - [https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/31/nyregion/hudson-city-bank-settlement.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/31/nyregion/hudson-city-bank-settlement.html)

- Los Angeles and Baltimore show that communities of color have lower levels of access to parks and green space.
  - [https://lusk.usc.edu/sites/default/files/working_papers/Wolch.parks_.pdf](https://lusk.usc.edu/sites/default/files/working_papers/Wolch.parks_.pdf)
  - [https://www.nrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/jrnl/2009/nrs_2009_boone_001.pdf](https://www.nrs.fs.fed.us/pubs/jrnl/2009/nrs_2009_boone_001.pdf)

# **Jobs and Hiring**
**Black people have less access to good jobs than whites, and experience a disproportionate amount of job hiring discrimination compared to whites.**

- [Quillian et al. 17](https://www.pnas.org/content/early/2017/09/11/1706255114)
  - **Meta-analysis** of “every available field experiment of hiring discrimination against African Americans or Latinos” - adding up to **55,842 applications submitted for 26,326 positions**
  - Found that **since 1989, there has been no change in hiring discrimination against blacks**, though hiring discrimination against Latinos has decreased over that time

- [Georgetown University: Carnevale et al. 19](https://1gyhoq479ufd3yna29x7ubjn-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/Full_Report-The_Unequal_Race_for_Good_Jobs.pdf) ([interactive](https://cew.georgetown.edu/cew-reports/raceandgoodjobs/))
  - Compared to blacks and latinos, **whites have a disproportionate level of access to good jobs regardless of education attainment**
    - “We define good jobs as those that pay at least $35,000 per year, at least $45,000 for workers age 45 and older, and $65,000 in median earnings in 2016. Wages for good jobs between 1991 and 2016 are inflation-adjusted.”
  - Whites also get higher earning in jobs than blacks and latinos, regardless of education attainment
  - **These disparities lead to major annual earnings gaps:**

- [https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13504851.2015.1114571](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13504851.2015.1114571)

- [https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/0002828042002561](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/0002828042002561) This study is famous, emily and greg vs lakisha and jamal. Has been widely criticized though
  - There’s another study done with this one in mind by a conservative group, but iirc it had some methodological flaws not in the original study

- Salary inequality is perpetuated by companies asking your past salary. Making that illegal improved African-American salaries by 13%. [https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3628729](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3628729)

- [https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/374403](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/374403) people with criminal records are more likely to have a harder time getting employed. Combine this with over-policing in black communities and you get a disproportionate amount of black people who have a rough time getting employed. Curious!

- [Minorities Who 'Whiten' Resumes Get More Job Interviews](https://www.forbes.com/sites/hbsworkingknowledge/2017/05/17/minorities-who-whiten-resumes-get-more-job-interviews/%236f8a07c37b74)
  - "Employer callbacks for resumes that were whitened fared much better in the application pile than those that included ethnic information, even though the qualifications listed were identical. Twenty-five percent of black candidates received callbacks from their whitened resumes, while only 10% got calls when they left ethnic details intact."  
  - "Employers claiming to be pro-diversity discriminated against resumes with racial references just as much as employers who didn’t mention diversity at all in their job ads."

- [Wage gap between blacks and whites is worst in nearly 40 years](https://money.cnn.com/2016/09/20/news/economy/black-white-wage-gap/)
  - “Attaining a higher education also failed to close the gap between black and white workers, '' the report found. Black men with a bachelor's degree or more and who had 11 to 20 years of work experience made 27.2% less than whites with the same level of education and experience. Black women with a bachelor's degree or more and 11 to 20 years of work experience were paid 10.6% less than white women.  
  - Recent college graduates with less than ten years of work experience also saw gaps in earnings by race. Black women with a bachelor's degree alone were paid 10.7% less than white women, while black men with the same credentials were paid 18% less than their white counterparts.”
  - [Padilla et al, 2019](https://www.pnas.org/content/116/35/17225)
    - **“In general, asset allocators have trouble gauging the competence of racially diverse teams. At stronger performance levels, asset allocators rate White-led funds more favorably than they do Black-led funds.”**
    - Specifically deals with investors and high finance-a good counterpoint to class reductionists.

### **1. "It’s illegal for employers to discriminate based on race."**

- Employment discrimination law in the United States derives from the common law. Also employment discrimination or harassment in the private sector is not unconstitutional because Federal and most State Constitutions do not expressly give their respective government the power to enact civil rights laws that apply to the private sector.

- Disparate treatment can be justified under CRA (Civil Rights Act) 1964 §2000e-2(e) if an employer shows selecting someone reflects by "religion, sex, or national origin is a bona fide occupational qualification (BFOQ) reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise.” Although race isn’t included, [the First Amendment will override Title VII in artistic works where the race of the employee is integral to the story or artistic purpose](https://www.jstor.org/stable/20439087).

- John Hendrickson, who spent 36 years as an EEOC attorney in Chicago before retiring in 2017, said too many cases are falling through the cracks. “Many of [the cases] weren’t professionally investigated.” Each year, the EEOC and its state and local partner agencies close more than 100,000 cases, but workers receive some form of assistance, such as money or a change in work conditions, only 18% of the time. Employees seeking help are even less likely to get it now than when Law went to the agency. In fact, no group of workers alleging discrimination, age, gender, disability, or otherwise, fares well. Race claims, however, are among the most commonly filed and have the lowest rate of success, with just 15% receiving some form of relief, often compensation.

### **2. "The welfare state made black people unemployed."**

The link between welfare and joblessness is groundless and blinds us to what actually happened, leading to a distorted and dehumanizing understanding of both racism and poverty in the US. For unemployment rates to reach the massive rates they did (around 40-50% for the lowest-skilled Black working-age men from 1980-2000, compared to 20-25% among the same demographic from 1940-1960,) there is almost always a problem with the number of jobs available, not simply how many people want to work. So what would decrease the number of jobs available? First, there was a large wave of Black migration from the rural south to the urban north and west—as well as the urban south—in the 1940s and 50s, and the cities from the urban north were never able to provide enough jobs for all of these folks (who were seeking reprieve from the brutality and economic exploitation of the Jim Crow south). Racism drove them to these cities, where they were segregated into neighborhoods of other poor Black folks. Even though there weren’t enough jobs to go around, the manufacturing boom gave enough employment to improve the lot of many fleeing the south, reducing poverty during the '60s. Then, deindustrialization. The economy began to transition from an industrial and manufacturing economy—where most of the Black folks in these cities worked—to a deindustrialized, service-based economy in the ‘60s, ‘70s, and ‘80s. Capital (and the affluent, disproportionately white population, as well as the small Black middle class) moved out of cities and into suburbs, and the employment system Black folks had relied upon and which had already strained under the number of jobseekers finally collapsed. The welfare state policies of the War on Poverty were not useless, but they did not come anywhere close to the scope of the problems caused by these other structural factors. The knock-on effects of this concentration and subsequent deindustrialization were the rise in crime and decline in marriage that people often erroneously pin on welfare state programs. If a huge proportion of working-age men in your community cannot find any work, you can expect that many of them might seek out less legitimate ways of earning money through crime, and this would cyclically break down social networks of care and trust. The loss of tax dollars from the affluent residents of cities who had moved to the suburbs meant that services and infrastructure that were most necessary were crippled. You might expect that women would struggle to find men they were willing to marry if jobs were scarce. It certainly did not help that means-tested benefits would often drop off sharply if you were married, but this is not an inevitable feature of the welfare state. It’s the result of a badly designed policy. Universal benefits—say, a child allowance—that do not change if you get married would not have this disincentive effect. Pointing to the moment when the War on Poverty programs started and then pointing at the rise of unemployment and crime in the latter half of the 20th century is exactly the problem with correlation not being the same as causation and it’s a post hoc fallacy too. The problem is that the story basically ignores any structural factor other than welfare—and quite a number of things happened in the lead-up to the dramatic rise of unemployment and crime that you link to the welfare state. Popular videos on the internet again and again show the problem of correlation: there’s no time spent establishing that the welfare state was the primary cause, you’re just simply asserting it to be so. International comparisons also cast doubt on this story. If welfare disincentivizes work, you would expect that countries that spend a lot on welfare also have lower rates of work. But this is not at all what we find: employment rates and workforce participation rates are consistently high in countries like the Nordics where welfare spending is also much higher than in the US. We’ve gotten it wrong and blamed poor and Black people for social problems that would not exist without massive structural factors working against them. If we want to know how to help the least of these, we must first know why things are the way they are. In the case of this phenomenon, racism and deindustrialization—not the growth of America’s modest welfare state—were the driving forces.

# **Education**
- [Jarvis et al. 19](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1948550619875150?mod=article_inline) ([cited](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/black-children-are-more-likely-to-be-disciplined-than-white-kids-for-the-same-behavior-2019-10-16))
  - Study of race and its effect in the classroom
  - *“Black students are **disciplined more frequently** and **more severely** for the **same misbehaviors** as White students”* regardless of the rate at white and black misbehavior
  - *“Principals endorsed **more severe discipline** for **Black students** compared with White students”*
  - *“Further, this discipline severity was explained through Black students being **more likely to be labeled a troublemaker** than White students”*

- [U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights 14](https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/crdc-discipline-snapshot.pdf)
  - Black children are **consistently being suspended and expelled** disproportionately to white kids, even as early as in preschool
  - “*More than **one out of four boys of color with disabilities** — and nearly one in five girls of color with disabilities — receives an **out-of-school suspension**”*
  - *“Black students represent **16%** of student enrollment, they represent **27%** of students referred to law enforcement and **31%** of students subjected to a school-related arrest”*
  - *“Black students represent 19% of students with disabilities served by IDEA, but 36% of these students who are restrained at school through the use of a mechanical device or equipment designed to restrict their freedom of movement”*

- [Ramey 15](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0038040715587114)
  - *“Schools and districts with relatively larger minority and poor populations are **more likely to implement criminalized disciplinary policies**, including suspensions and expulsion or police referrals or arrests, and less likely to medicalize students through behavioral plans put in place through laws such as Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act”*

- [GAO 18](https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-18-258)
  - Black students are overrepresented in suspensions and other disciplinary action, as are students with disabilities

- [U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights 14](https://ocrdata.ed.gov/Downloads/CRDC-Teacher-Equity-Snapshot.pdf) 
  - Concerns about access to experienced teachers: Black, Latino, American Indian and Native-Alaskan students attend schools with **higher concentrations of first-year teachers** at a higher rate (3 to 4%) than white students(1%). English learners also attend these schools at slightly higher rates (3%) than non-English learners(2%).
  - Teacher salary disparities: Nearly **one in four districts** with two or more high schools reports a **teacher salary gap** of more than $5,000 between high schools with the highest and the lowest black and Latino student enrollments.
  - Access to certified teachers: While most teachers are certified, nearly half a million students nationwide attend schools where 60% or fewer of teachers meet all state certification and licensure requirements. Racial disparities are particularly acute in schools where uncertified and unlicensed teachers are concentrated; nearly **7% of the nation’s black students** – totaling over half a million students – attend schools where **80% or fewer of teachers meet these requirements**; black students are more than four times as likely, and Latino students twice as likely, as white students to attend these schools.

- [Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor 2005](https://paperhub.ir/dl4.php?doi=10.1016/j.econedurev.2004.06.008&key=ph6u0fGLhGS2c)
  - Uses microlevel data from North Carolina to examine the distribution of teacher experience for Black and White students.
  - They find that **Black students are** **much more likely to be in a classroom with a novice teacher than are their White student peers** (e.g., Black seventh graders are **54% more likely to have a novice teacher in math** and **38% more likely to have a novice teacher in English than White students**).
  - The authors decompose these differences into **district, school, and classroom effects** and **find considerable effects at each level**: **In math**, for instance, **38% of the gap is due to teacher sorting across districts, 37% is due to teacher sorting across schools within districts, and 25% is due to teacher sorting across classrooms within schools**.

- [Clifford et al. 2005](https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ978266)
  - A **significantly higher percentage** of **African American (50%), Latino (75%),** and **Asian (66%) children** than **White children (23%)** attended a pre-k class with a **high concentration of children from low-income backgrounds.**

- [U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights 14](https://cdn.uncf.org/wp-content/uploads/PDFs/CRDC-College-and-Career-Readiness-Snapshot-2.pdf)
  - A **quarter of high schools** with the highest percentage of black and Latino students do not offer Algebra II; a third of these schools do not offer chemistry. **Fewer than half** of American Indian and Native-Alaskan high school students have access to the full range of math and science courses in their high school.
  - Growing opportunity gap in gifted and talented education: Black and Latino students represent **26%** of the students enrolled in **gifted and talented education programs**, compared to black and Latino students’ **40% enrollmen**t in schools offering gifted and talented programs.
  - Advanced Placement (AP) course enrollment and testing: Black and Latino students make up 37% of students in high schools, 27% of students enrolled in at least one Advanced Placement (AP) course, and 18% of students receiving a qualifying score of 3 or above on an AP exam.
  - Higher rates of retention for students of color, English learners, and students with disabilities: Students with disabilities served by IDEA and English learners make up 12% and 5% of high school enrollment, respectively, but 19% and 11% of students held back or retained a year, respectively. (Some students may be counted in both categories). Twelve percent (12%) of black students are retained in grade 9 — about double the rate that all students are retained (6%).

- [The Condition Of College & Career Readiness 15](https://cdn.uncf.org/wp-content/uploads/PDFs/6201-CCCR-African-American-2015.pdf)
  - Research demonstrates that **academic gaps begin before high school**. Without solid academic foundations established in primary and secondary school, African American students will continue to be academically underprepared for college in large numbers.
  - When students are **not adequately prepared** on the K–12 level, they are more likely to need remedial or developmental courses in college, which offer **no course credit**, yet students often **have to pay for these classes**. This leads to longer completion times and the need for additional financial aid, both factors that contribute to higher rates of attrition. Unfortunately, research demonstrates that African American students are more likely to need remedial courses than other students and also have significant financial need for higher education compared to other students.
  - African American students are more likely to be in schools that offer **less rigorous courses**, which can hamper the college admissions process.

- [Brown Center on Education Policy 17](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/2017-brown-center-report-on-american-education.pdf)
  - Found that **suspension rates** of black students begin to **escalate during middle school**, and that the racial disparity in suspensions increases dramatically once black students comprise 16% or more of a school’s student population.

- [A 2011 study](https://web.archive.org/web/20181122122731/https://csgjusticecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/Breaking_Schools_Rules_Report_Final.pdf) of school discipline in Texas found that **after isolating race by adjusting for 83 other variables**, a black student had a 31 percent greater chance of being disciplined than an identical white or Hispanic student.

- [A study of suspensions in Chicago schools](https://web.archive.org/web/20170902011336/https://consortium.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/publications/Suspending%20Chicagos%20Students.pdf) from 2013 to 2014 found that black male students were more than five times more likely to be suspended than white and Asian male students. Black female students were seven times more likely than white and Asian female students. After adjusting for academic level and social disadvantages, black males were still five times more likely to be suspended, while the disparity for black females grew to 13 times more likely.

- [https://scholar.harvard.edu/ang/publications/effects-police-violence-inner-city-students](https://scholar.harvard.edu/ang/publications/effects-police-violence-inner-city-students)
  - “*Nearly a thousand officer-involved killings occur each year in the United States. This paper documents the large, racially-disparate impacts of these events on the educational and psychological well-being of public high school students in a large, urban school district. Exploiting hyper-local variation in how close students live to a killing, I find that exposure to police violence leads to persistent decreases in GPA, increased incidence of emotional disturbance and lower rates of high school completion and college enrollment. These effects are driven entirely by black and Hispanic students in response to police killings of other minorities and are largest for incidents involving unarmed suspects.*”

- [https://edbuild.org/content/23-billion](https://edbuild.org/content/23-billion) ([cited](https://www.usnews.com/news/education-news/articles/2019-02-26/white-students-get-more-k-12-funding-than-students-of-color-report))
  - About differences in funding between white and black schools

- [Kohli et al. 17](https://www.sjsu.edu/people/marcos.pizarro/publications/KohliPizarroNevarez2017.pdf)
  - Brown vs Board of Edu didn’t end racism in the classroom:
    - *“Despite the discourse of racial progress through integration, Judge Robert L. Carter (1968), who presented part of the oral argument in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, lamented the persistence of racism:...Judge Carter argued that the changes in policy and practice that emerged from Brown and other civil rights legislation addressed superficial symptoms, leaving the disease of White supremacy/racism embedded in U.S. institutions.”* (Kohli et al. [pg. 184]).
  - Race Scholar Richard Valencia: intellectual inferiority and cultural deprivation were prominent theories used to uphold racial inequality in schooling, **today, individualized analysis of underachievement are tools that maintain the status quo.**
  - **Dominant rhetoric blames students of Color and their families for a lack of academic success,** pusing a shift in behavior instead of institutional chane(e.g., reminding parents to read more to their children; advocating for a growth mind-set), rather than suggesting shifts to structures or policies that systematically fail students of Color (e.g., limited resources, racial profiling; Malagon & Alvarez, 2010).
  - **Education reifies racism.** Doucet and Keys Adair (2013) explain in their review of research on early childhood classrooms, much of the work emphasizing “diversity” does so as an undeveloped afterthought rather than through an actual paradigm shift that weaves diverse histories and perspectives into the school, thus reifying racism. (Ex. For identifying other cultures, or groups, curriculum emphasizes how this deviates from the white middle class norms.) (pg. 187)
  - **Neo-liberal privatization practices reinforce systemic racism.** (ex. No Child Left Behind and the “Meritocracy 2.0”): Masked as an accountability narrative for achieving racial equality in schools, corporate-driven testing practices affirm racial hierarchies of student success
  - Through an ethnographic case study (Stovall, 2013), and critical race discourse analysis of newspaper articles, community forum transcripts, and school board meeting notes (Briscoe & Khalifa, 2015), **two key studies illuminate how school closures disproportionately and negatively affect working-class urban Black neighborhoods. (pg. 188).**
  - **Language is used as a factor in reinforcing racism:** the way we perceive immigration through the lens of institutionalized dominance reinforces classroom behavior/ justifies white supremacy. (pg. 380 from Perez Huber (2011))
  - **Colorblind approach:** Despite attempts to equate colorblindness to equity, qualitative and conceptual studies demonstrate how silence around race maintains and legitimates racism, thus constructing hostile racial climates for students of Color (Castagno, 2008; Chapman, 2013; Love, 2014) and teachers of Color (Amos, 2016; Kohli, 2016; Souto-Manning & Cheruvu, 2016).

- [https://educationdata.org/student-loan-debt-by-race](https://educationdata.org/student-loan-debt-by-race)
  - Black and African American college graduates owe an average of $25,000 more in student loan debt than White college graduates.
  - Four years after graduation, 48% of Black students owe an average of 12.5% more than they borrowed.
  - Black and African American student borrowers are the most likely to struggle financially due to student loan debt, with 29% making monthly payments of $350 or more.
  - 54% of all student loan debt is held by White and Caucasian student borrowers.
  - White and Caucasian students have the most cumulative student loan debt.
  - Black and African American bachelor’s degree holders have an average $52,000 in student loan debt.
  - 40% of Black graduates have student loan debt from graduate school while 22% of White college graduates have graduate school debt.
  - Over 50% of Black student borrowers report their net worth is less than they owe in student loan debt.
  - Four years after graduation, 48% of Black students owe an average of 12.5% more than they borrowed. 
  - Black and African American student borrowers are the second-most likely to have monthly payments of $350 or more.
  - At 46%, Black student borrowers were the most likely to put off buying a home.
  - At 43%, Black indebted student borrowers are also the most likely to report having to work more than they would prefer.
  - In 2007/’08, Black bachelor’s degree holders were the most likely among their indebted peers to describe their educational debt-related stress as “very high.”

- Despite efforts to improve the situation on college and university campuses, such as implementing affirmative action plans, anti-Black racism and violence continue to occur. [https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0002764207307742](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0002764207307742)

# **Voting and Voter ID**
**Voter ID isn’t inherently racist but can and has been strategically used before to target racial minorities. Strict Voter ID laws tend to disproportionately impact minorities.**

- [Kuk et al. 19](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/21565503.2020.1773280) ([cited](https://medium.com/mit-election-lab/a-disproportionate-burden-a6521956423e))
  - Includes a nice literature review in regards to past studies which demonstrate how minorities are disproportionately impacted by stricter Voter ID laws
  - **A number of strict voter-ID laws have been implemented across multiple states in the last several years, and they generally hurt minority turnout**
  - “*Our primary analysis uses aggregate county turnout data from 2012 to 2016 and finds that the racial gap in turnout between more diverse and less diverse counties grew more in states enacting new strict photo ID laws than it did elsewhere – **even after controlling for other factors that could impact turnout. Strict voter ID laws appear to discriminate**.*”


- [https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1532673X18810012](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1532673X18810012)
  - Minorities are less likely to possess valid identification (which differs from state to state) than whites: "In the combined dataset, about 81% of Blacks possessed a valid ID, compared with 91% of Whites, 82% of Latinos, 85% of Asians, and 86% of those who identify some other way."

-  [https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2053168015589804](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2053168015589804)
  - Republicans just so happen to support more stringent voter ID laws when their districts have a higher non-white population: "among Republican legislators, a higher black district population increases legislators’ support for voter ID, whereas among Democratic lawmakers, a higher black district population reduces legislators’ likelihood of voting in favor of restrictive voter ID legislation"

- [https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1532673X16687266](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1532673X16687266)
  - "Demographic factors condition many of these relationships, with Republicans more likely to enact a number of these laws in states with large Black and Latino populations, particularly when they first come to power." "At best this link indicates a lack of effective representation for minorities in this area and at worst an attempt to diminish the influence minority members have on elections."

- A long but great article on voter suppression: [https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/democracy/reports/2018/11/20/461296/voter-suppression-2018-midterm-elections/](https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/democracy/reports/2018/11/20/461296/voter-suppression-2018-midterm-elections/)

- [https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20180306](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20180306)
  - **Distance to a polling location affects high-minority areas more**: “the disproportionate impact of distance to the polling place in high-minority areas contributes to between 11 and 13 percent of the participation gap between low- and high-minority areas during non-presidential elections.” “a hypothetical benchmark policy that eliminated distance to the polling place would increase average turnout by 1.6–4 percentage points and narrow the turnout gap between low- and high-minority areas in non-presidential elections by as much as 11–13 percent.”

- [https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-locations/southern-u-s-states-have-closed-1200-polling-places-in-recent-years-rights-group-idUSKCN1VV09J](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-locations/southern-u-s-states-have-closed-1200-polling-places-in-recent-years-rights-group-idUSKCN1VV09J)
  - In the south, 1,200 polling locations have been closed since civil rights era legislation was weakened in 2013
  - This is more to provide context for the other studies in this section

- [https://today.law.harvard.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/FullReportVoterIDJune20141.pdf](https://today.law.harvard.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/FullReportVoterIDJune20141.pdf)

## Specific Instances:

- [https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/federal-court-finds-texas-voter-id-law-violates-voting-rights-n613481](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/federal-court-finds-texas-voter-id-law-violates-voting-rights-n613481) texas

- [PBS: Childress 16](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/court-north-carolina-voter-id-law-targeted-black-voters/)
  - North Carolina voting law ruling “**targeting African Americans with nearly surgical precision**”, struck down by supreme court
  - In 2016 Republicans attempted to pass voting restrictions right after **requesting a voter breakdown by race**
  - The Supreme court reviewed this restrictions and stated that:
    - “In response to claims that intentional racial discrimination animated its action, the State offered only meager justifications. Although the new provisions target African Americans with almost surgical precision, they constitute inapt remedies for the problems assertedly justifying them and, in fact, impose cures for problems that did not exist.”
    - The restrictions did not end up passing due to the Supreme court's verdict
  - [http://electionlawblog.org/wp-content/uploads/nc-4th.pdf](http://electionlawblog.org/wp-content/uploads/nc-4th.pdf) legal file regarding this, it’s quite long

- [https://www.theroot.com/long-lines-for-black-voters-anticipated-as-kentucky-cut-1844123045](https://www.theroot.com/long-lines-for-black-voters-anticipated-as-kentucky-cut-1844123045) **kentucky cut thousands of polling locations** prior to the 2020 democratic primary against Mitch McConnell, which was expected to disenfranchise thousands of black voters

- [https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/north-carolina-voter-id/](https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/north-carolina-voter-id/) North carolina again but in 2013-4

# **Youth**
**Focusing on black youth is particularly important as racial discrimination can still impact them even in these more formative years, setting them up for a worse future compared to their white peers.**

- [Black teens who commit a few crimes go to jail as often as white teens who commit dozens](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/01/30/black-teens-who-commit-a-few-crimes-go-to-jail-as-often-as-white-teens-who-commit-dozens/?utm_term=.fa43b9a1be29) 
  - "Although there were negligible differences among the racial groups in how frequently boys committed crimes, white boys were less likely to spend time in a facility than black and Hispanic boys who said they'd committed crimes just as frequently, as shown in the chart above. A black boy who told pollsters he had committed just five crimes in the past year was as likely to have been placed in a facility as a white boy who said he'd committed 40."

- [The Essence of Innocence: Consequences of Dehumanizing Black Children](www.apa.org/pubs/journals/releases/psp-a0035663.pdf) 
  - "We find converging evidence that Black boys are seen as older and less innocent and that they prompt a less essential conception of childhood than do their White same-age peers. Further, our findings demonstrate that the Black/ape association predicted actual racial disparities in police violence toward children."

# **Affirmative Action**
**Affirmative action is about accounting for the inequality experienced in school systems. Despite studies showing that students benefit from having teachers who look like them, the overwhelming majority of teachers are white, even in areas with a high percentage of racial minorities and black people aren’t treated well in the school system either. Many children enter the public school system without knowing English and somehow manage to make enough progress to graduate high school with high GPAs. Not to mention the differences between ethnicities that have low levels of parent involvement in education due to systemic racism. Affirmative action isn't about skin color, it's about accounting for struggles overcome that other students haven't dealt with. Overlooking these factors would not only be unfair to minorities, but it would mean that colleges wouldn't always get the best students.**

### **1. "Affirmative Action is reverse discrimination against white people."**

- Evidence demonstrates that discrimination against white men is rare. For example, of the 91,000 employment discrimination cases before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, approximately 3% percent are discrimination cases against white men. Further, a study conducted by Rutgers University and commissioned by the U.S. Department of Labor (1995) found that discrimination against white men is not a significant problem in employment and that a "high proportion" of claims brought by white men are "without merit." Affirmative action provides the employer with the largest pool of qualified applicants from which to choose.

- [http://www.eeoc.gov/initiatives/e-race/significant-eeoc-racecolor-casescovering-private-and-federal-sectors](http://www.eeoc.gov/initiatives/e-race/significant-eeoc-racecolor-casescovering-private-and-federal-sectors) 

- [https://www.aauw.org/](https://www.aauw.org/)

- According to the Commerce Department, there are fewer than 2 million unemployed Black civilians and more than 100 million employed White civilians (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1994). Thus, even if every unemployed Black worker were to displace a White worker, less than 2% of Whites would be affected. Furthermore, affirmative action pertains only to job-qualified applicants, so the actual percentage of affected Whites would be a fraction of 1%. The main sources of job loss among White workers have to do with factory relocations and labor contracting outside the United States, computerization and automation, and corporate downsizing.

- [https://www.census.gov/library/publications/1994/compendia/statab/114ed.html](https://www.census.gov/library/publications/1994/compendia/statab/114ed.html)  
  - Even if Harvard removed every black applicant from its admission pool, the odds of a white person getting in only goes up by 1%. [https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0895904815616484](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0895904815616484)

- White women benefit the most from affirmative action.
  - [https://www.vox.com/platform/amp/2016/5/25/11682950/fisher-supreme-court-white-women-affirmative-action](https://www.vox.com/platform/amp/2016/5/25/11682950/fisher-supreme-court-white-women-affirmative-action)
    - “A 1995 report by the Department of Labor found that 6 million women overall had advances at their job that would not have been possible without affirmative action. The percentage of women physicians tripled between 1970 and 2002, from 7.6 percent to 25.2 percent, and in 2009 women were receiving a majority of bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees, according to the American Association of University Women. To be clear, these numbers include women of all races; however, breaking down affirmative action beneficiaries by race and gender seems to be rare in reported data.”
  - [https://www.jstor.org/stable/4316599?seq=1](https://www.jstor.org/stable/4316599?seq=1)
    - “Despite the significant benefits to white women from affirmative action programs in education, employment, and contracting; and despite the likelihood that gender discrimination, like its racial counterpart, would intensify in the absence of these programs, white women have been noticeably absent from the front lines of affirmative action's defense-even in the face of open assaults on such policies”

- Most White college kids that get into college are not merit based
  - [https://edreformnow.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Admissions-Background-Memo.pdf](https://edreformnow.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Admissions-Background-Memo.pdf)
    - “In short two key practices – embrace of early decision and legacy preferences – systematically and structurally benefit students that are overwhelmingly white and upper income”
    - “There are more white students admitted to top ten universities after having benefited from an “alumni preference” than Black or Latinx students admitted after having benefited from affirmative action policies. In some cases, there are more white legacies than Black and Latinx students combined.”
  - [https://www.jstor.org/stable/40197326?seq=1](https://www.jstor.org/stable/40197326?seq=1)
    - “Since alumni from selective colleges and universities historically have been disproportionately white, admissions policies that favor legacies have disproportionately benefited white students.”
  - [https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w26316/w26316.pdf](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w26316/w26316.pdf)
    - “Among white admits, over 43% are ALDC. Among admits who are African American, Asian American, and Hispanic, the share is less than 16% each. Our model of admissions shows that roughly three quarters of white ALDC admits would have been rejected if they had been treated as white non-ALDCs.”

### **2. "Affirmative action is discrimination against Asians."**

- [A 2016 study](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0895904815616484) found that eliminating affirmative action would not increase the number of Asian Americans in elite colleges. When you completely eliminate Black and Latinx applicants from the Harvard admissions pool, the admissions rate for all remaining Asian American and white students only increases by 1%. This means that rejected Asian American and white applicants were unlikely to be admitted even with the omission of race.

- Affirmative action opponents don’t have the interests of Asians in mind. Rather, Asian students are being weaponized against marginalized college hopefuls. They intentionally invoke the model minority myth by portraying all Asians as highly successful individuals unfairly hurt by affirmative action. This advances the false narrative that Asian American students are a monolith, and completely ignores Asians who do not fit the model minority stereotype.
  - There are also large discrepancies between various subgroups in the Asian American community. For example, only 27% of Vietnamese Americans and only 17% of Hmong and Cambodian Americans hold a bachelor’s degree or higher.

- Furthermore, Southeast Asian Americans benefit from affirmative action policies. While Blum claims he is protecting the interests of Asian Americans, his lawsuit ignores the fact that an overwhelming majority — 70% —  of Asian Americans agree with affirmative action. It’s no surprise, then, that more than 135 Asian American organizations banded together to support affirmative action.

### **3. "Under affirmative action, minorities receive preferences."**

Most supporters of affirmative action oppose this type of preferential selection. Affirmative action does not require preferences, nor do women and minorities assume that they will be given preference. Race, gender, and national origin are factors that can be considered when hiring or accepting qualified applicants. Hiring qualified women and minorities is similar to the preferences given to veterans in hiring and to children of alumni in college admissions. There are also other preferences used in selecting qualified candidates. For example, when private colleges and universities value geographic diversity on their campuses, an out-of-state student may be admitted before an in-state student. Some colleges and universities consider athletic abilities and/or evidence of leadership skills in addition to academic qualifications. Only 3% of institutions indicate race has “considerable influence” in admissions decisions. Instead, there were 14 other criteria, such as test scores, grades, writing samples, and extracurricular activities, which were more likely to be considered than race. Only 11% of institutions reported that race had moderate influence, while 19% reported limited influence on admissions decisions. Overall, only one-third of four-year public and private institutions consider race in any way, minor or major, when evaluating applicants.

### **4. "Affirmative Action is about quotas."**

1. Under existing law, quotas are illegal.
2. Federal contractors are required to establish goals and timetables, and to make a good- faith effort to meet them. Race, national origin, and gender are among several factors to be considered, but relevant and valid job or educational qualifications are not to be compromised. Further, the Supreme Court has made clear that affirmative action or programs that claim to be affirmative action are illegal if: (1) an unqualified person receives benefits over a qualified one; (2) numerical goals are so strict that the plan lacks reasonable flexibility; (3) the numerical goals bear no relationship to the available pool of qualified candidates and could therefore become quotas; (4) the plan is not fixed in length; or (5) innocent bystanders are impermissibly harmed.

### **5. "Unqualified people get accepted under affirmative action."**

Only affirmative action plans that do not compromise valid job or educational qualifications are lawful. Plans must be flexible, realistic, reviewable, and fair. The Supreme Court has found that there are at least two permissible bases for voluntary affirmative action by employers under Title VII: (1) to remedy a clear and convincing history of past discrimination by the employer or union, and (2) to cure a manifest imbalance in the employer's work force. Thus, affirmative action programs are intended to hire the most qualified individuals, while at the same time achieving equality of opportunity for all.

### **6. "It should be based on income, not race."**

Income-based approaches don’t yield equal results when it comes to increasing the number of Black and Brown faces on campus. The suggestion to replace race with income dangerously and falsely signals that race is a negligible factor that has very little impact on students’ educational and broader social experiences. Additionally, income-based approaches won’t account for racial differences for students from similar socioeconomic backgrounds. Black, Latino, and White students from similar income backgrounds have considerable differences in their enrollment at highly selective postsecondary institutions. And the racial differences become more profound as family income increases. Income-based affirmative action would ignore these differences by race, and would place another hurdle in the path of many Black and Latino Students. In the fourth income quartile, Black students trail White students by 8 percentage points, and by the fifth income quartile, the gap grows to 26 percentage points. The enrollment gap clearly shows that income is not enough: Colleges and universities need to continue using race as a factor in admissions.

### **7. "Affirmative Action doesn’t work."**

- According to a recent report from the Labor Department, affirmative action has helped 5 million minority members and 6 million White and minority women move up in the workforce. [https://www.nytimes.com/1995/03/31/us/reverse-discrimination-complaints-rare-labor-study-reports.html](https://www.nytimes.com/1995/03/31/us/reverse-discrimination-complaints-rare-labor-study-reports.html)

- A study sponsored by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs showed that between 1974 and 1980 federal contractors (who were required to adopt affirmative action goals) added Black and female officials and managers at twice the rate of non contractors. [https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED248283](https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED248283)

- There have also been a number of well-publicized cases in which large companies (e.g., AT&T, IBM, Sears Roebuck) increased minority employment as a result of adopting affirmative action policies.

# **Black Culture**
**Culture is still an institution/system. Implicit learning of culture is largely subliminal but people pick up on certain cultural cues throughout the course of their life and learn certain behaviors based on how those around them act. This comes as a direct or indirect result of their material conditions; in fact in order to change the “culture”, the environment would have to change completely.**

- [Chetty et al. 18](https://www.equality-of-opportunity.org/assets/documents/race_paper.pdf) ([summary](https://www.equality-of-opportunity.org/assets/documents/race_summary.pdf))
  - Excellent study that finds the gap in generational income and outcome between races (even in similar conditions between families).
  - Rebuts against common conservative talking points about systemic racism.
  - Also combats innateness if you want a race realism rebuttal - the sort of racial disparities we see with black men aren’t really present with black women, even though both are black
  - Black children born to parents in the bottom household income quintile have a **2.5% chance of rising to the top quintile of household income,** compared with **10.6% for whites.**
  - Poor white children struggle in parts of the Southeast and Appalachia. But they still fare better there than poor black children do in most of America. In effect, the worst places for whites produce outcomes that are about as good as the best places for blacks. [Maps] suggest that part of the reason the Southeast looks bad for all children, in the middle map, is that the region is home to many black children who fare particularly poorly there.
  - **African-Americans** made up about **35 percent** of all children raised in the **bottom 1 percent** of the income distribution. They made up **less than 1 percent** of the children at the very top.
  - More than two-thirds of black boys are raised by poor or lower-middle-class families, while more than half of white boys are raised by rich or upper-middle-class families.
  - The few neighborhoods where poor black boys do as well as whites were in areas that showed less discrimination in surveys and tests of racial bias.

- [https://www.nber.org/papers/w9227.pdf](https://www.nber.org/papers/w9227.pdf)
  - Measures the impact of past injustices (slavery in this case) on how groups are set back relative to their peers
  - Finds that for enslaved blacks, it took 2 generations for them to catch up with free blacks. That’s a lot of time!
    - When comparing blacks overall to whites, they found that blacks have been converging with the path of whites over time **but they still haven’t fully caught up**. That’s a lot of time post Jim Crow, certainly more than 2 generations
  - “*This paper has demonstrated that on certain basic outcome measures, namely literacy, schooling, and occupation, **the descendants of slaves "caught-up" to the descendants of free blacks within two generations**. This statement is particularly true when we identify the effects of slave status by comparing descendants of free blacks and slaves who reside outside of the South. **If we instead measure the progress of free blacks and slaves (and their descendants) relative to whites born in the same regions, then we find partial but not complete convergence**.*”

- [https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/files/2015076pap.pdf](https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/files/2015076pap.pdf)
  - White families **are twice as likely to receive an inheritance as black families, and that inheritance is nearly three times as much.** Even among black families who inherit wealth, **the racial wage gap is much larger, compared to white families who inherit wealth.** For families with an inheritance, **median white wealth is 7.5 times larger than for black families.** Comparatively, **white families have 5.4 times more wealth than black families without an inheritance.** The importance of inheritances to the wealth position of white families is staggering. At the median, an inheritance increases wealth by **more than $100,000 for white families and only $4,000 for black families.**

- [https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/11_blackwhite_isaacs.pdf](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/11_blackwhite_isaacs.pdf)
  - Average income for both White and Black families has increased since the 1970s. However, average income for White families in their 30s has increased from $50,000 to $60,000 from 1975 to 2005, compared to an increase from $32,000 to $35,000 for Black families of the same age over the same period.
  - In addition to receiving a lower average income, its growth is also less for Black families (10% growth) than their White counterparts (19% growth).
  - Two of three White children born into families in the middle quintile have achieved a higher family income than their parents. Conversely, only one of three Black children born into families in the middle quintile has achieved a higher family income than their parents.
  - On average, Black children whose parents were in the bottom or second quintile do exceed their parents' income, but those whose parents were in the middle or fourth quintile actually have a lower income than their parents. This is a very large difference compared to Whites, who experience intergenerational income growth in every quintile except the highest.
  - This shows that in addition to lower wages with less growth over time, it is less likely for Black families to experience upward economic mobility than it is for Whites.

- [https://www.stlouisfed.org/~/media/Files/PDFs/HFS/20160525/papers/Hamilton-paper.pdf](https://www.stlouisfed.org/~/media/Files/PDFs/HFS/20160525/papers/Hamilton-paper.pdf)
  - “**Inheritance, bequests and in-vivo transfer** account for more of the racial wealth gap than **any other** **behavioral, demographic or socioeconomic indicator.**”

- [https://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2012/pursuingamericandreampdf.pdf](https://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2012/pursuingamericandreampdf.pdf)
  - **Sixty-six percent of blacks** raised in the **second quintile surpass** their **parents’ family income** compared with **89 percent of whites.**
  - **Only 23 percent of blacks** raised in the **middle surpass** their **parents’ family wealth** compared with **over half (56 percent) of whites.**
  - **Over half of blacks (53 percent)** raised in the **bottom of the family income** ladder remain **stuck in the bottom as adults**, compared with only **a third (33 percent) of whites. Half of blacks (56 percent)** raised** in the **middle of the family income** ladder **fall to the bottom two rungs as adults** compared with just **under a third of whites (32 percent).**
  - **Half of blacks (50 percent)** raised in the **bottom of the family wealth ladder remain stuck in the bottom as adults**, compared with only **a third (33 percent) of whites.** **More than two-thirds of blacks (68 percent)** raised **in the middle fall to the bottom two rungs of the ladder as adults** compared with just **under a third of whites (30 percent).**

## **Common Black Culture Myths:**

### **1. "It has nothing to do with race, and everything to do with culture."**

- First of all, this doesn’t make sense because it’s something you can’t quantify or empirically test for. Second of all, this argument also overlooks positive trends in critical areas such as education, crime and teen pregnancy (pregnancy and birth rates among black teenagers are down 40 percent since 1990). Third of all, this exaggerates the cultural differences between white and black Americans. We forget that white and black youths listen to rap today and that neither white people nor black people like being poor. The record is clear: when opportunities are available to black Americans, they take them. When opportunities are scarce, they fall behind, and culture has very little to do with it. It’s purely speculative, surmisable, conjectural, suppositious, unsubstantiated, and ostensibly abstract in nature based on stereotypes & anecdotes which are just based off of ambient animus. This is not consistent with the scientific method.
  - Let’s take a step back here and think about how statistics like these have been used over the past century. The first time these kind of figures became relevant was after the 1890 census, when Frederick Hoffman, an accountant in New Jersey, calculated that blacks accounted for 30% of the nation’s prisoners but only 12% of the population. The conclusion that Hoffman drew – and that many others have drawn, even into the present – is that African Americans have an innate predisposition toward criminality, whether cultural or genetic.
  - W.E.B. DuBois countered this assertion with a study of black crime in Philadelphia, which he argued was the result of sociological factors – particularly urbanization and industrialization – rather than some innate character trait of black people. Yet the assumption stuck, and even to the present a belief that criminality represents proof and cause of black inferiority remains very strong in American society. (Khalil Gibran Muhammad discusses this at length in his book, The Condemnation of Blackness: Race, Crime, and the Making of Modern Urban America; here’s an interview in which he discusses the 1890 census.)
  - Yet the higher percentage rate of imprisonment among blacks in 1890 was to a large degree the result of a conscious effort by Southern whites to reduce blacks to a captive, servile labor force through the use of the criminal law. Remember that even though slavery was abolished after the Civil War, most white Southerners did not view its abolition as legitimate and did everything in their power to install a racial order in which blacks would once again be a servile laboring class without political rights – essentially slaves in all but name. This was accomplished in part through the Black Codes, which criminalized African-American behavior that was deemed contrary to this order. For example, many states passed vagrancy laws, which required blacks to sign work contracts for fixed periods – if they were found without these contracts, they would be arrested for vagrancy.
  - Other states and municipalities passed what some call “pig laws”, turning forms of petty theft from misdemeanors into felonies, allowing for heavy terms of imprisonment for blacks who committed offenses as trivial as stealing a pig – hence the name. (And in many cases, it was not even theft; blacks were engaged in work disputes with landlords and employee, and claimed property they believed was rightfully their own – only to be arrested for the same.)
  - Law officers were granted a large degree of discretion in enforcing these statutes, and the police were virtually without exception whites with a strong racial bias. What’s more, black prisoners were put to work through the convict lease system, which gave landlords, corporations, states, and municipalities access to very cheap labor, and which played a central role in the industrialization and urbanization of the South at the turn of the last century; about 73% of Alabama's entire annual state revenue came from convict leasing in 1893. So the entire criminal justice system had a vested interest in securing higher rates of arrest, conviction and imprisonment among blacks, both as a source of profit and a means of reinforcing white supremacy. The heavy involvement of blacks in the criminal justice system, in turn, fostered racial ideas about their inferiority. As Muhammad puts it: “Defining black criminality through racial and cultural markers of inferiority was at the heart of post-emancipation race relations. Black Codes, Pig Laws, convict leasing, chain gangs, and lynching were direct consequences of inventing new ways of thinking about blacks and using criminal laws, criminal justice practices, and violence to target them—all tracked by statistics, reifying racist presumptions that blacks were an exceptional and dangerous criminal population.” (p. 284)
  - So starting this discussion in the 1950s is misleading, in that it fails to account for why this association of African Americans and criminality exists - an association that has its origins in Reconstruction and the beginnings of Jim Crow segregation.
  - (See also the PBS documentary, Slavery By Another Name, based on Douglas Blackmon’s book of the same name.)
  - (For more on the use of statistics, crime, and race, see this video: [https://youtu.be/2xuo32Z2EMA](https://youtu.be/2xuo32Z2EMA).)

### **2. "Black culture doesn’t value education so that’s why it sucks in the black community/they’re not graduating high school and dropping out."**

This is blatantly not true, African Americans value education; however, there are other factors that makes the education they experience lower quality

- [https://news.rice.edu/2013/11/12/african-americans-are-the-most-likely-to-value-postsecondary-education/](https://news.rice.edu/2013/11/12/african-americans-are-the-most-likely-to-value-postsecondary-education/)

- [https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2013/10/09/07fenwick_ep.h33.html](https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2013/10/09/07fenwick_ep.h33.html)

- [https://cepa.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/reardon%20et%20al%20state%20achievement%20gaps%20aug2013.pdf](https://cepa.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/reardon%20et%20al%20state%20achievement%20gaps%20aug2013.pdf)

- [https://cepa.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/wp15-12v201510.pdf](https://cepa.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/wp15-12v201510.pdf)

Which Black people specifically would they be referring to who aren’t graduating? Because Black people are graduating in fact the black and white graduation rate is similar and only differ by 3 percentage points (85.8% vs 88.8%). Not to mention how 88% of black people have their high school diploma.

- [https://www.infoplease.com/us/education/educational-attainment-race-and-hispanic-origin](https://www.infoplease.com/us/education/educational-attainment-race-and-hispanic-origin)

- [https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2020/06/black-high-school-attainment-nearly-on-par-with-national-average.html](https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2020/06/black-high-school-attainment-nearly-on-par-with-national-average.html)

### **3. "Just don’t break the law."**

This would make sense if there was actually differential offending, which there’s little evidence that there is. Instead there is differential police presence, patrolling, and profiling, combined with discrimination in the courts and correctional systems which leads to more Black people being arrested, convicted, and incarcerated more frequently which is not necessarily indicative of differential offending. Indeed, It is correct that Black people are disproportionately convicted of crimes. However, the main problem lies in the idea that convictions are one-to-one equivalents of perpetrated crimes, especially in the context of racist police and legal systems. 

### **4. "Blacks have a gang culture/rap that makes them commit crimes."**

Multiple studies have found that a variety of factors influence gang membership, and those factors usually are closely related to poverty, bad schooling environments, and bad upbringings - certainly not exclusively cultural, but in a lot of ways reflective of the amount of poverty and hardship a community is going through

- [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0190740914001741](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0190740914001741) looks at what conditions correlate with gang participation
  - Poor neighborhood quality has a higher likelihood of predicting gang involvement than negative peer groups. (AOR: 1.43 vs. 1.08).

- [https://web.stanford.edu/class/e297c/poverty_prejudice/ganginterv/gangsproblems.htm](https://web.stanford.edu/class/e297c/poverty_prejudice/ganginterv/gangsproblems.htm) goes over a number of common reasons why people join gangs

Although Rap emerged in the 1970s gangster rap emerged around 1985. Early rappers like Sugar Hill Gang and Run-D.M.C mixed rock music and funk and told stories about their lives. But if you look at the crime rates for these periods, crime increased in the 60s and 70s whereas it plateaued in the 80s and it’s fallen consistently despite the fact rap has stayed just as “violent” as it was in the 80s and 90s. Various criminologists have done studies into this and found that it is bad criminology and sociology to conclude rap music causes violence. They even go as far to say it’s racist since it is attributing something bad to black culture that doesn’t cause the bad thing. Other studies have found that media consumption has no effect on children’s violence. [https://www.disastercenter.com/crime/uscrime.htm](https://www.disastercenter.com/crime/uscrime.htm) [https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library/abstracts/does-rap-music-contribute-violent-crime-taking-sides-clashing-views](https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library/abstracts/does-rap-music-contribute-violent-crime-taking-sides-clashing-views) [https://www.christopherjferguson.com/LYOJPed.pdf](https://www.christopherjferguson.com/LYOJPed.pdf)

### **5. "Whites have no responsibility in the development of black culture, blacks have been on their own for a while now so any burden on them is their fault, not that of whites."**

The conditions in which black culture started out happened to be in a situation in which they were constantly beaten down and discriminated against and this continued over the course of centuries - through slavery, jim crow, etc. they haven’t had a lot of time to work outside of these overt forms of discrimination, either - plenty of black boomers were direct victims of jim crow. Thus, white-instigated racism still has had a huge influence on black culture today. If we take this argument to be the case — that Black culture produces behaviors that further their disadvantaged economic position — this is not something created by any individual Black American, but rather inherited as a set of cultural circumstances. Can they be blamed for acting in a way that gains them what anyone is looking for — social acceptance and getting their needs met — within that cultural setting? A person of average willpower would, in aggregate, behave the same given that cultural environment as the average Black person. To say otherwise is, ultimately, to claim that Black people as a whole have behaved more poorly given their inherited culture than other people would. To make such a move would be to assign an essential racial inferiority to Black people. 

### **6. "The welfare state is to blame for black culture."**

Why would it be that Black culture would adapt to the material conditions of the welfare state but not the material conditions of, say, housing discrimination and deindustrialization leading to unemployment? The rational conclusion is that people who make this argument want to downplay the history of material deprivation and inequality that led to the behaviors they want to condemn and magnify the role welfare had to play in those behaviors because they have an ideological predisposition to oppose welfare.

### **7. "Black people are just bad at spending their money."**

- White families actually [spend more and save less](https://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/bitstream/handle/10161/13809/2332649216647748.pdf?sequence=1) than black families with the same income. Yet white families have way more wealth than black families with the same income. Low-income black households spend $5,223 on average compared with $7,058 for low-income white households, middle-income black households spend $9,113 (vs. $11,106 for white households), and top-income black households spend $16,527 (vs. $21,075 for white households).
  - Even after accounting for factors such as family structure, income, occupation, and geography, as well as wealth and homeownership, white households at all income levels continued to spend more than comparable black households, with low-income white households spending $1,200 more per quarter than low-income black households and high-income white households spending $1,400 more than their black counterparts.
  - So, the average white household spends 1.3 times more than the average black household of the same income group.
  - [The same researchers](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6641572/pdf/nihms-1041011.pdf) also looked at specific categories of spending, finding that white households spend about twice as much as black households on entertainment among all income groups and that white households, especially those with low incomes, spend more than black households on cars. The researchers note that “for clothing, jewelry, personal care, entertainment, eating out, and other non-essential spending, our findings show that black consumers in fact spend the same or much less than whites, at all income levels.” The only category in which black households were found to consistently spend more was for utilities, including payments for electricity, heating fuel, water, sewer and telephone service; this may be due to the common utility company practice of risk-based pricing, which requires a deposit or other form of additional payment from customers with low credit scores, without stable employment, or with criminal records. While technically color-blind, risk-based pricing can have a disproportionate impact on black consumers, causing them to be charged more than white households for the same service.

### **8. "Asian people were oppressed and interned during ww2 and discriminated against afterwards, so why aren't they as bad off as blacks are?"**

These days, the majority of America's Asian population is only one or two generations removed from legal immigrants who came to America for merit-based citizenship. That automatically puts them, on average, at an advantage - even over poor white Americans.

Immigration from Asia was historically suppressed by legislation like the Chinese Exclusion Act (1882) and the Immigration Act of 1924. It wasn’t until the Immigration and Nationality Act in 1965 that immigration from Asia boomed. [In just over 50 years, the population of Asian Americans went from 980,000 in 1960 to 20.4 million in 2015](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/09/08/key-facts-about-asian-americans/) - 1960 was *after* the WWII concentration camps. Today 72% of the adult US Asian population was born outside of the US.

Being a heavily-immigrant population, Asian Americans on average have a better education and background compared both to the average white or native-born American and compared to the general populations in their country of origin, due to selection processes by America’s immigration system.

### **9. "Jewish people were oppressed so why aren’t they as bad off as blacks are?"**

This is not comparable because:
- Jewish people received Israel.
- Germany paid $33 billion in reparations.
- Holocaust survivors get $300 annually.
- The U.S gave $12 million in reparations to holocaust survivors in 2015.
- The U.S agreed to give Israel over $38 billion in 2016 over a 10-year period.

### **10. "Black immigrants are successful in America and they’re black, why aren’t they as bad off as blacks are?"**

The syllogistic format of this argument is as follows:
- P1: You can't distinguish black immigrants and African Americans just by looking at them.
- P2: P1 implies that the level of systemic racism endured by black immigrants and African Americans is essentially the same.
- P3: Black immigrants earn more, are employed more, and generally do better than African Americans in society.
- C: The effects of systemic racism are minimal.

**Multiple hypotheses have been formulated for P3** including Cultural Distinction Theory, Black Immigrants Privilege, Immigrant Selectivity Theory, Queuing Theory, Lateral Mobility Hypothesis, etc. Specifically, the Cultural Hypothesis was advanced in 1978 through a paper by Thomas Sowell, [Three Black Histories](http://archive.wilsonquarterly.com/essays/ethnicity-three-black-histories). He basically posits that the differences we see in the data between African Americans and Black immigrants are to be attributed to a diversity in customs and cultures.

However, **the Immigrant Selectivity Hypothesis** instead conjectures that the observed differences between Black Immigrants and African Americans are due to immigrant selectivity. Immigrant selectivity is the stylized fact that immigrants aren’t selected at random from their population of origin. Instead they exhibit different traits with respect to individuals who do not immigrate. This would mean that Black immigrants have more “hard” and “soft” skills than those they join at the new destinations and those left behind in their country of origin, see [Model 1995](https://academic.oup.com/socpro/article-abstract/42/4/535/1684827?redirectedFrom=PDF).

Another hypothesis is **the Lateral Mobility Hypothesis** which conjectures that immigrants do better if they had socioeconomic conditions that were higher than average in their countries of origin. The underlying assumption is that socioeconomic status replicates itself, over and above, group differences in skills, see [Darity 2003](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1536-7150.00070).

**Ultimately, the hypothesis that gets the most traction in the literature is the Immigrant Selectivity one** ([Hamilton 2014](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4767170/pdf/nihms-598661.pdf); [Ifatunji 2017](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/socf.12347)). Additionally, this argument runs into a problem. In fact we see through reports that these two groups diverge through time and can be dated back to 1925, see [Domingo 1925](https://www.unz.com/pbuchanan/reining-in-the-rogue-royal-of-arabia/). In addition, the data used for Thomas Sowell’s Cultural Hypothesis is in 1970. Should we accept this argument, would that mean that systemic racism was minimal in 1970? 5 years after Jim Crow was outlawed? What about in 1925? Even if we granted that African Americans and Black Immigrants differ in culture, which is the minimal position held in the scientific community, why would that imply that systemic racism is minimal? Assuming systemic racism exists, both Black immigrants and African Americans could earn a lot more if systemic racism were not holding them both down. Ultimately the premises don’t support the conclusion so it’s a non sequitur.

#### **10a. Nigerian-American Immigrants**

[https://aninjusticemag.com/but-what-about-nigerian-americans-b5e846b85479](https://aninjusticemag.com/but-what-about-nigerian-americans-b5e846b85479)

- “To understand why the Nigerian American population became so successful, it’s important to understand how our Nigerian American population developed. This requires a basic understanding of the history of U.S. Immigration law, something most of us never learned in school. The current Nigerian American population is composed of first wave (1970s and ’80s) immigrants, second wave (1990s and after) immigrants, and their children.

- Regarding the first wave of Nigerian immigrants: "Nigeria was one of the few countries willing to sell oil to the U.S. during the 1973 oil embargo crisis. During this time, the Nigerian government also provided scholarships for Nigerian students who wanted to study abroad in America. These scholarships covered the cost of education at state schools like the University of Nebraska or Ivy’s like Harvard and Yale. If you had a choice between free beef jerky and free filet mignon, what would you pick? Exactly. Many Nigerian Americans got an all-expense-paid trip to an Ivy League University. These Nigerians knew that going to graduate school and becoming a doctor, lawyer or engineer was the best way for them to become American citizens. After becoming citizens, they could sponsor relatives for citizenship, relatives who were able to enter the United States as legacies at top universities. First-generation Nigerian Americans who immigrated in the ’70s and '80s had the advantage of free education."

- "Nigerian Americans didn’t ‘rise to the top’ so much as they were cherry-picked from the top. I’m not discounting the hard work it takes to become a doctor or lawyer, nor am I saying that Nigerian Americans don’t deserve their success. I’m saying there’s a bigger picture that we often ignore in favor of the ‘model minority’ stereotype, and continuing to ignore that picture harms and demeans us all. If you took the entire NBA bubble and moved it to Mongolia, it might seem to Mongolians that most first-generation American Mongolians were either basketball players, sports agents or coaches. If you took the top one percent of income earners in America and moved them to Chile, it might look to Chileans like all Americans are rich. Cherry-picking creates a false sample size, and this skewed sample size is the heart and soul of the model minority myth."

### **11. "The black single motherhood rate jumped from 20% to 70% after the welfare state was implemented."**

- “Single motherhood” can be defined as parents who live together but never married/children just born out of wedlock, or widows, or divorced. In reality black fathers are more likely to be in their children’s lives than not. [https://medium.com/national-center-for-institutional-diversity/evolving-the-single-black-mother-narrative-eaee03cce251](https://medium.com/national-center-for-institutional-diversity/evolving-the-single-black-mother-narrative-eaee03cce251)
  - Fatherlessness among the black population is only about 42% anyway, the 70% number was literally pulled out of someone’s ass. 70% of black fathers were also more likely to participate in certain activities with their children such as bathing and clothing them, feeding them, reading to them, helping with homework, and overall doing more of a “very well” job in parenting compared to 43% white fathers. [https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr071.pdf](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhsr/nhsr071.pdf)
- A Boston University 2007 study  noted that black fathers who don’t reside in the home are more likely to sustain regular contact with their children than fathers of any other racial group. According to the US Census Bureau, single black fathers raising children on their own comprise some 353,000, or nearly 16%, of single-father households. From "[The Myth of the Missing Black Father](https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Myth_of_the_Missing_Black_Father.html)" : An increasing number of quantitative and qualitative studies find that of men who become fathers through nonmarital births, black men are least likely (when compared to white and Hispanic fathers) to marry or cohabit with the mother (Mott 1994; Lerman and Sorensen 2000). But they were found to have the highest rates (estimates range from 20% to over 50%) of visitation or provision of some caretaking or in-kind support (more than formal child support). For instance, Carlson and McLanahan’s (2002) figures indicated that only 37 percent of black non marital fathers were cohabiting with the child (compared to 66% of white fathers and 59% of Hispanic), but of those who weren’t cohabiting, 44% of unmarried black fathers were visiting the child, compared to only 17% of white and 26% of Hispanic fathers.
- Black women had increased economical autonomy but also black men were less stable for labor in the 1940s, partially because of technical work that they never received an education for. [https://www.jstor.org/stable/2137521](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2137521)
- 71% of poor families with children are headed by single parents, regardless of race. [https://www.heritage.org/poverty-and-inequality/report/marriage-americas-greatest-weapon-against-child-poverty-0](https://www.heritage.org/poverty-and-inequality/report/marriage-americas-greatest-weapon-against-child-poverty-0)
- Incarceration and employment dynamics actually account for a lot of the black-white marriage gap. [https://ideas.repec.org/p/hka/wpaper/2018-074.html](https://ideas.repec.org/p/hka/wpaper/2018-074.html)
- Only 28% of solo parents are black and 1 in 9 of those are fathers. [https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2018/04/25/the-changing-profile-of-unmarried-parents/](https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2018/04/25/the-changing-profile-of-unmarried-parents/)
  - Not to mention how people of color are significantly more likely to live in extended family households. [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5863740/pdf/nihms903779.pdf](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5863740/pdf/nihms903779.pdf)
- An African American child is six times as likely as a white child to have or have had an incarcerated parent. [https://www.epi.org/publication/mass-incarceration-and-childrens-outcomes/](https://www.epi.org/publication/mass-incarceration-and-childrens-outcomes/)

#### **11a. Great Society Act**

The Great Society Act was not to blame for the rise in African American fatherlessness.
1. Rates of fatherlessness for white people have always been lower than for black people, but fatherlessness among whites still rose between 1960 and 2012. 6% of white children lived in a single-mother household in 1960, a figure that rose to 18% in 2013. that’s a tripling, which was proportionately an even bigger percentage increase than what was observed for black children.

2. Douglas J. Besharov, a public policy professor at the university of Maryland, said the official data on black marriage from the early-to mid-20th century is unreliable. it was not uncommon, he said, for black mothers to tell survey-takers that they were separated, when in fact they had never been married, he said. The data for white women is similarly misleading, since many young white women got married as teens and divorced a few years later -- a "shotgun wedding" pattern that doesn’t suggest long-term stability for children. This pattern would mean that the frequency of non-marital births among African Americans have been higher than what the early 1960s statistics officially indicated, and the white rate of non-marital births have been artificially low.

3. The welfare rules of the 1960s may have imposed a "marriage penalty" on recipients. benefits that could be earned as a single person would disappear once a recipient got married. but such a pattern should have become evident well before the Great Society Act. Timothy M. Smeeding, director of the Institute for research on poverty at the university of wisconsin said, “‘welfare’ was part of the new deal in the 1930s,...it was designed for widows with kids who didn’t qualify for social security, but it soon became a single-parent program for divorcees and later unmarried mothers.”

4. Just because rates of fatherlessness rose after Johnson and the great society act doesn’t mean they caused the increase. Lots of other factors were at play. besharov said the focus on johnson is off-base. he said that the broader social currents of 1960s "liberalization" - more permissive sexual mores, easier divorce laws and greater financial independence due to rising rates of female employment, for instance, did play a role in higher rates of single-motherhood for all races, but "if you define ‘the great society’ as the things johnson did, then there was very little impact" on single motherhood rates. [https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2014/mar/25/facebook-posts/facebook-meme-blames-great-society-large-rise-afri/](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2014/mar/25/facebook-posts/facebook-meme-blames-great-society-large-rise-afri/)

### **12. "Black people need to pull themselves up by the bootstraps and work harder."**

“I believe we ought to do all we can and seek to lift ourselves by our own bootstraps but it’s cruel to say to a bootless man that he ought to lift himself by his own bootstraps.” - [MLK](https://youtu.be/2xsbt3a7K-8)

We understand from a social science perspective and a psychological perspective that people put in certain environments elicit predictable outcomes. To tell everyone to overcome circumstance is to ask an entire dataset to become outliers which is literally impossible.

[Furthermore](https://insightcced.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Umbrellas_Dont_Make_It_Rain_Final.pdf), white families with a head that is unemployed have nearly twice the median wealth of black families with a head that is working full-time.

#### **12a. The "[follow 3 simple rules to join the middle class](https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/three-simple-rules-poor-teens-should-follow-to-join-the-middle-class/)" argument**

Haskins and Sawhill overlook a lot in their path to arrive at these figures, and they admit that their study has serious methodological flaws. The first is that the data is not considering one's likelihood of poverty in general, but rather specifically focusing on the incidence rate of poverty in 2007. There is no attempt to develop causality, and no explanation for why there are more poor people who followed all three rules than poor people who did not.

Beyond that, subsequent research and re-evaluation by Brookings found that the "three rules" break down when accounting for race. Even among black people who followed all three rules, only 59% defined as "middle income" or above, and 75% were at or below 500% of the poverty line (compared to 58% of whites). It's also difficult to determine the degree of choice involved in full-time employment, which was the most important of the "three rules" by far. [https://www.vox.com/2015/7/24/9027195/haskins-sawhill-norms-marriage](https://www.vox.com/2015/7/24/9027195/haskins-sawhill-norms-marriage) [https://www.brookings.edu/research/following-the-success-sequence-success-is-more-likely-if-youre-white/](https://www.brookings.edu/research/following-the-success-sequence-success-is-more-likely-if-youre-white/)

### **13. "Black people have a victim mentality."**

This argument presumes that persons of color are too stupid to already know what it is they’re experiencing. Those who bemoan the so-called victim mindset appear to believe that no one would think about racism were it not for the constant presence of liberals and leftists raising the issue.

The argument also suggests that black and brown folks are so weak-willed that if they really understood the obstacles in their way, they would crumble like pie crust. The truth is, folks of color (especially African Americans) are well aware of the negative stereotypes held about their racial group by an early age. Indeed, recent evidence indicates an awareness of these stereotypes by as soon as the third grade, and rarely later than the fifth: around the age of, say, eleven.

This awareness–which is not due to liberals bringing it up, but rather, the result of black and brown folks living with the mistreatment that stems from the stereotypes and being exposed to them in media and elsewhere–has been found to dramatically impact academic performance. Even (and especially) among highly capable and motivated students of color, the fear of living down to a stereotype has been shown to generate such anxiety that it can suppress performance, relative to ability, thereby perpetuating the very performance gaps that feed the stereotypes about black intelligence in the first place. In other words, whether or not white racism is discussed, the knowledge of its existence is sufficient to negatively impact black and brown success. Talking about racism isn’t the problem: racism itself is.

### **14. Stereotype Accuracy**

This topic also wraps into the work of researcher Lee Jussim, who has heavily advocated for the concept of stereotype accuracy.

- <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AQvATilESV7C6cZN4dQhSswZKSTN0lVGOJRlJ25RbFY/edit#>

- <https://archive.ph/BqQ7X> 
 - Thread shows why the data is often horribly wrong - **read the thread**

# **Racial Segregation (Historical)**
**Compilation of historical documents and sources regarding racial segregation across the globe**

*“The genesis of race — its various elaborations and proliferation throughout imperial rule — is a heuristic angle and a valid reason for detecting correspondences between contemporary segregating mechanisms and colonial segregation rationales” (Picker 17)*

- Dynamics of Race and Racial Segregation
  - [Picker 17](http://giovannipicker.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Racial_Cities_Introduction.pdf) (DYNAMICS)
    - *“Originated upon the rise of empires, since its birth, race has been conceived as a way of organizing exploitation, and more generally subjugation, of Jews, Muslims and other non-whites in the forms of religious-based stigmatization and exclusion; slavery, segregation and mass deportation. Race emerged as part of the colonial project not as an exogenous product, but within continuous circulations, borrowing and learning processes between external (colonial) and internal (within the metropole) strategies, observations, interpretations, beliefs and practices concerning personhood and morality. Colonies, in this process, largely functioned as laboratories for experimentation in social engineering in the metropole (Stoler 1997; Stoler and Cooper 1997).”*
    - *“Class formation is intimately part of racial hierarchies. The naturalization of class difference is deeply rooted in social organizations, material arrangements and social perceptions. In light of this, race is, as Stuart Hall (2002[l980], 62) maintained, “also the modality in which class is ‘lived,’ the medium through which it is appropriated and ‘fought through.’ Race and class, therefore, are mutually linked; their link is historically inscribed in the colonial encounter, which structured “native” societies around the naturalization of gendered class hierarchies, and in which the poor were infantilized and deemed “naturally” at a lower stage of civilization. This remains chiefly relevant today as a principle reproducing global inequality between the wealthier, largely white Global North, and the poorer, mostly nonwhite Global South (Winant 2004). Due to relational constitution of race, it becomes clear how racial dynamics happen in various and changing ways according to each social context, and unfold in sometimes totally unpredictable manners. Disclosing these processes, therefore, implies keeping categories of analysis open and malleable to the encountered realities.”* [pg. 9]

- United States of America
  - [Milewski 17](https://books.google.com/books?id=zXo7DwAAQBAJ&pg=PA47%23v=onepage&q&f=false)
    - Fraudulent measures (Ballot-box stuffing, adding extra votes for Democrats) taken to reduce the impact of the Black vote in southern USA [pg. 48]
    - Terrorism was used by white mobs against minorities. At the peak of violence in1892, 161 lynchings of African-Americans were recorded in the USA [pg. 48]
  - [Perman 09](https://books.google.com/books?id=jVHODYI1fNUC&pg=PA138%23v=onepage&q&f=false)
    - Explains race-based campaigns whereby policy differences between parties were made irrelevant in favor of  differentiation on racial grounds. Southern democrats altered the political reality of the Southern USA such that there was no "Democrat" or "Republican" but rather "White supremacy" and "Black rule" respectively
    - Such is shown in cases like the Wilmington Insurrection of 1898 that sought to remove African-Americans from the city of Wilmington:
    - *"North Carolina is a WHITE MAN'S STATE and WHITE MEN will rule it, and they will crush the party of [racial epithet] domination beneath a majority so overwhelming that no other party will ever dare to attempt to establish [racial epithet] rule here."*  -Furnifold Simmons
    - *"It will be the meanest, vilest, dirtiest campaign since 1876. The slogan of the Democratic party from the mountains to the sea will be but one word ... '[N word]'!"* -Daniel Schenck
  - [https://www.tuck.dartmouth.edu/uploads/content/African_American_Inequality_in_the_United_States_(HBS_Case).pdf](https://www.tuck.dartmouth.edu/uploads/content/African_American_Inequality_in_the_United_States_\(HBS_Case\).pdf) for a nice summary of historical examples of racism (some of them rather recent on a generational timescale!)

- United Kingdom/British Empire
  - [Alozie 20](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/98q1c1d1)
    - Space and Colonial Alterity: Interrogating British Residential Segregation in Nigeria, 1899-1919
    - *"Race would, in turn, become an identifiable marker of difference. It was the medium through which alterity could be sufficiently regulated regardless of the region. In colonial Nigeria, attempts at social spacing were not as overt and concerted as in East and southern Africa. This paper maintains that while other factors were involved, race also played a crucial role in creating difference as reflected in the policy of residential segregation, particularly in colonial Lagos."*

- Europe (WIP)
  - [Picker 17](http://giovannipicker.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Racial_Cities_Introduction.pdf) (ROMANI)

- Colonized Africa
  - South Africa
  - [Brazilian Journal of African Studies 20](https://www.seer.ufrgs.br/rbea/article/viewFile/108497/58883%23page=189) (general Africa)
    - SOCIO-SPATIAL AND ETHNIC-RACIAL SEGREGATION IN MEGACITIES, LARGE CITIES AND GLOBAL CITIES IN AFRICA
    - *“Kibera, for example, a neighborhood west of the city center and one of Africa’s largest irregular occupations, was left behind. Its formation began when the British authorized soldiers returned from the war to occupy the residual areas of the railway that crosses Nairobi. As in other large African cities, the following development plans were “strategic” and favored neoliberalism to build an “African metropolis”, in favor of reinforcing socio-spatial segregation (Njeru 2012).”* [pg. 199]
    - *“By contrast to Eurocentrism, heeding Hall’s (2002) claim in her Civílízing Subjects that I quoted in the epigraph to this Introduction, Racial Cities contributes to “provincializing” European cities by squarely framing the analysis within the colony—metropole nexus as one of the foundational processes of past and contemporary global inequalities. The most immediate reason for such a decentering perspective is not only that socio-spatial segregation alongside “diversity lines” first appeared in colonized cities (Nightingale 2012)”* (Picker 17 [pg. 8]).

- Other colonies… (WIP)
    - 

### **1. "Africans sold their own into slavery."**

The Africans who were placed on board the ships of the Atlantic Slave Trade were prisoners of war from other African Tribes, people deemed criminals, and poor members of society traded to pay off their debt. It’s important to remember that being a prisoner of war or a poor member of society traded for goods is not the same as being held in inter generational hereditary chattel slavery. I.e generations of children being born into bondage.

### **2. "Anthony Johnson was the first slave owner and he was black."**

**This specific response is pulled from [this r/badhistory post](https://www.reddit.com/r/badhistory/comments/2mhnpc/anthony_johnson_shows_up_in_askreddit_yet_again/) but a more detailed response can be found [here](https://www.aaihs.org/the-curious-history-of-anthony-johnson-from-captive-african-to-right-wing-talking-point/)**

“The man being referred to is Anthony Johnson, who was an indentured servant who earned his freedom. He purchased a couple of indentured servants of his own, and in 1653, those servants either ran away or were let go. In 1655 Johnson won a court case against one of those servants who was ordered back into service with Johnson as a "servant for life". This is the basis for the claim that Anthony Johnson was the first slave owner in America. Several problems with this.

1. The first non-natively owned slaves in the Americas were native peoples in South America
2. The first slaves in North America were also native peoples enslaved by Europeans.
3. The first African slaves in the Americas were enslaved by the Spanish in Portuguese in South America.
4. The first African slaves in North America were Spanish slaves as part of the San Miguel de Gualdape which was established in 1526. Other Spanish sites in North America had African slaves long before Anthony Johnson came along.
5. The first indentured servants arrived in America within the first decade after the settlement at Jamestown.
6. The first black people in English colonies in Jamestown arrived in 1619 as indentured servants.
7. John Winthrop of Massachusetts and Samuel Maverick of Massachusetts both owned slaves before 1630. Winthrop arrived by 1630, Maverick was in Massachusetts by 1625.
8. In 1638 some Pequot Indians taken in raids were exchanged for African slaves/servants in the West Indies. This would not be the last time this would happen.
9. In 1641 Massachusetts would pass it's first slave law.
10. In 1640 John Punch was sentenced to indentured servitude for life by a Virginia court for attempting to run away to Maryland.
11. Anthony Johnson would not win his case against Castor until 1655, at \*least\* 15 years after the first confirmed court case of indentured servitude for life.
12. The United States didn't exist in 1655.

So, no matter what way we look at it, there's absolutely no way in which Anthony Johnson can be considered the first slave owner in the United States.”

### **3. "White people were slaves too."**

The claim that Irish people were enslaved in the British American Colonies stems from a misrepresentation of the idea of “indentured servitude.” Indentured servants were people required to complete unpaid labor for a contracted period. While the majority of Irish people who became indentured servants in the Colonies did so willingly (why they felt they had to so is, of course, another question), a not insignificant number were forcibly deported and sold into indentured servitude. Many indentured servants in the British colonies were working-class white immigrants from the British Isles, including thousands of Irish people. Indentured servants were often treated horribly by their masters, many dying before they were set free. Crucially, indentured servants were considered human beings under the law. African slaves were seen as property rather than people; Africans were racialized as Black to cement this enslaved status as permanent, inheritable and justifiable in the natural order. An indenture implies two people have entered into a contract with each other but slavery is not a contract. It is often about being a prisoner of war or being bought or sold bodily as part of a trade. That is a critical distinction. This lack of legal and social personhood, as well as accompanying racist ideologies, let slave owners justify the many horrors inflicted on African slaves at mass scale. Millions of Africans were shipped to the Americas and forced into unprecedentedly cruel conditions, both in terms of scale and severity. African slaves had no legally recognized rights. They were regarded as private property over which owners claimed absolute authority, a fundamental characteristic of slave status in all New World slave societies.

#### **3a. Barbary Slave Trade**

The Barbary Slave Trade was not a parallel to white European/Americans' enslavement of black Africans. The Barbary city-states allowed, encouraged their captives to be ransomed back to Europe (and in a couple cases later on, America) for money. Judging by names on the records, 40-60% of corsair captains doing the actual raiding and enslaving were white Europeans who had nominally converted to Islam for profit and marauding. The actual period of enslavement for labor was relatively short, ending in the 17C, although kidnapping for ransom continued and tapered off in early 19C. (ETA) The Barbary trade was not limited to western European slaves. They labored alongside sub-Saharan Africans, eastern Europeans, and perhaps non-Muslim central Asians. There is no discernible impact on Europe's economy from the (temporary) loss of people, or money paid out in ransom, or even really the hit to company and military coffers from the loss of ships. (This is actually kind of a mystery to historians, leading many to doubt whether the Barbary slave trade was as numerically large as other scholars have calculated.) The trans-Atlantic slave trade represented the systematic, long-term, broad-scale destruction of nations, peoples, and people. Slavery as an institution has existed for a very long time. What differentiates the transatlantic slave trade from the Barbary slave trade, Saharan slave trade, and other large scale movements of chattel slavery was the racial nature of the trade and the sheer volume of the trade. As a way to justify slavery, which was viewed negatively by Christian religious texts, white European slavers pushed the idea that black African slaves were subhumans who needed to be civilized through slavery. This is an idea that was unique to the European slave trade compared to other large scale slave trades. European powers also shipped nearly 13 million African slaves to the new world, an unthinkably massive number and much larger than other slave trades. [https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/44a46l/are_there_any_records_of_white_people_being/](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/44a46l/are_there_any_records_of_white_people_being/)

### **4. "People in the past didn’t know slavery was wrong."**

Slavery was a contentious issue from the start. In the original draft of the declaration of independence, Thomas Jefferson called slavery and the slave trade a crime against humanity and condemned it. This was cut out of the document due to South Carolina and Georgia’s objection. At the Constitutional Convention, southern states said that if slavery was abolished or if the slave trade was regulated, they wouldn't join the union. In fact, this debate got so heated that the South nearly walked out of the convention. Around the time of the convention, 7 of the 13 states had abolished slavery already and 10 of them had banned the slave trade. Immediately following the convention, Black men could vote in 6 states. The House of Representatives which was controlled by the South for a bit censored the mail to prevent abolition pamphlets from going to the South and they instituted a gag rule on slavery so that it couldn't be discussed in congress. The idea that no one knew slavery was wrong is false and to say that those who opposed it were a minority is also false. To say that is to ignore a lot of things the Founders said, the North's opposition to it, and that Europe had abolished slavery long before America. [https://socialequity.duke.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/7.2.20-how-america.pdf](https://socialequity.duke.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/7.2.20-how-america.pdf) [https://www.nytimes.com/1986/12/07/opinion/l-some-of-the-founding-fathers-vigorously-opposed-slavery-444686.html](https://www.nytimes.com/1986/12/07/opinion/l-some-of-the-founding-fathers-vigorously-opposed-slavery-444686.html) [http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1005153,00.html](https://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1005153,00.html) [https://www.npr.org/2015/07/03/419824340/scrapped-declaration-of-independence-passage-denounced-slavery](https://www.npr.org/2015/07/03/419824340/scrapped-declaration-of-independence-passage-denounced-slavery) [https://www.history.com/news/declaration-of-independence-deleted-anti-slavery-clause-jefferson](https://www.history.com/news/declaration-of-independence-deleted-anti-slavery-clause-jefferson) [http://inside.sfuhs.org/dept/history/US_History_reader/Chapter2/Winning%20the%20VoteA%20History%20of%20Voting%20Rights%20Gilder%20Lehrman%20Institute%20of%20American%20History.pdf](https://inside.sfuhs.org/dept/history/US_History_reader/Chapter2/Winning%20the%20VoteA%20History%20of%20Voting%20Rights%20Gilder%20Lehrman%20Institute%20of%20American%20History.pdf) [https://oaktrust.library.tamu.edu/bitstream/handle/1969.1/188838/rpa%20honor%202007.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y](https://oaktrust.library.tamu.edu/bitstream/handle/1969.1/188838/rpa%20honor%202007.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y) [https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/31/arts/a-refusal-to-compromise-civil-war-historians-beg-to-differ.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/31/arts/a-refusal-to-compromise-civil-war-historians-beg-to-differ.html) [https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/21/books/review-war-before-war-fugitive-slaves-civil-war-andrew-delbanco.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/21/books/review-war-before-war-fugitive-slaves-civil-war-andrew-delbanco.html) 

### **5. "Only a small percentage of white people owned slaves."**

The number was between 20 and 25%, and in some states, the rate was twice as high. According to the 1860 census every third white person in those states had a direct commitment to slavery. [https://socialequity.duke.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/8.10.20.pdf](https://socialequity.duke.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/8.10.20.pdf) [https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2020/jul/30/facebook-posts/us-was-one-last-countries-abolish-slavery/](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2020/jul/30/facebook-posts/us-was-one-last-countries-abolish-slavery/)

# **Defending Juneteenth**
**This is a relatively minor issue, but worth including just for when it comes around on the calendar (also because most of the arguments against Juneteenth are embarrassingly bad, so it’s more fun to rebut them)**

1. **"It's a race-based holiday and that's bad!"** Juneteenth is a celebration of racial progress (a good thing to celebrate), and we already have MLK day, which also has a focus on race and racial progress. If people opposed Juneteenth for being race-related, these people would also be consistent to oppose MLK day, even though none of them seem to have a problem with that holiday (suggesting race-related holidays aren't necessarily bad).

2. **"It's part of the democrat/marxist/CRT agenda!"** Unsurprisingly, you can celebrate the abolition of slavery without supporting marxism or CRT or whatever. You can even paint the holiday in a pro-republican light if you wanted to (in the 1800s, republicans were the anti-slavery party). Even if it is democrat/marxist/CRT, republicans (who oppose democrats, marxism, and CRT) certainly didn't view the holiday like that - it had strong bipartisan support in congress, with every single senate republican voting in favor and almost every house republican. Even Trump wanted to make Juneteenth a national holiday, something he included in his Platinum Plan for Black Americans. In fact, many GOP-oriented commentators had no problem with Juneteenth until this year - [Charlie Kirk](https://twitter.com/FrankLuntz/status/1405717239001587712), for example.

3. **"Juneteenth detracts from July 4th! It's another summer holiday and gives black people their own independence day!"** Though Juneteenth does celebrate the advancement of black independence and freedom (that's what ending slavery does), it does not try to redefine the independence day for the country as a whole, nor does it try to obfuscate July 4th. Again, plenty of republican representatives and commentators (people who are usually pretty nationalist and really care about July 4th) understood this in the past or continue to understand that today, see the above response.

4. **"It's a pointless virtue signal that doesn't lead to actual meaningful change."** For once, this is true. We should work towards meaningful policies which actually work to improve the condition of minority communities. However, it is worth noting that if Juneteenth doesn't really change anything, getting it repealed won't change anything either - so saying it's a virtue signal isn't a very compelling argument for *removing* the holiday. It's also worth noting that holidays in general are virtue signals that don't have much of an impact on the country - July 4th, for example, is essentially a virtue signal in support of American independence, but the fact that it’s just a virtue signal is not a compelling argument to stop celebrating July 4th.

5. **"It's another pride day that we don't need. We already have gay pride month, black history month, and so on. Why do we need more pride celebrations?"** Celebrating the abolition of slavery isn't necessarily something only black people can take pride in, but rather it's something everyone can take pride in as a step forward for America as a whole. Also, we can brand plenty of holidays as "pride days" and then use that as a pretext to oppose them. Going back to July 4th, we could easily rebrand that as "American pride day" and then ask why we have yet another unneeded pride day on our calendars. What's essentially happening with Juneteenth in this case is the rebranding of "celebrating slavery's abolition" into "celebrating black pride" so it can be dismissed as another pride day.

# **Additional Resources**
- [https://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/what_happens_when_you_educate_liberals_about_white_privilege](https://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/what_happens_when_you_educate_liberals_about_white_privilege)
  - Educating social liberals about white privilege is more likely to make them view poor whites negatively than it is to make them empathize with poor blacks

- [Landry & Marsh 11](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev-soc-081309-150047)
  - Explores discrimination of black middle class
  - Explains how class is tied with race

- [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0049089X12002621](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0049089X12002621)

## Responses to Common Questions about Discrimination Studies

### **1. "This study says they can't verify racist intent or to interpret the results with caution regarding intent (they can’t conclude outright that discrimination exists even if the evidence points in that direction)."**

Studies can’t empirically verify intent. Put simply you just don’t know off of your five senses what another person is thinking. So the most accurate thing is to say that: you don’t know. You can’t conclude whether or not they have discriminatory intent or not. The way these studies work is that they make scientific conclusions based off of the available evidence, however, they never make sociological conclusions because they’re criminological studies. When these studies say the conclusion shouldn’t be drawn, what they’re indicating is that these are criminological studies that can be used only to describe patterns in data. These patterns are that black people are treated unfairly when you isolate race as a variable. Scientists very rarely use absolute terms even when something has a 99.9% chance of happening it is still overwhelmingly likely.

We see this in published biomedical literature as well yet they’re still used in the biomedical field. A cursory scan of published biomedical literature reveals close variants of the phrase: “These results, however, should be interpreted with caution.” Searching PubMed abstracts for the phrase “interpret∗ caution” retrieves 555 citations published between January 2010 and August 2011, and screening the first 100 abstracts reveals that 90 indeed contain this phrase in full and in 79 of them it appears in the conclusion sections of abstracts for primary studies and systematic reviews, potentially leaving in the mind of the reader the lingering and unsettling feeling of uncertainty in comprehending the results. This poses the obvious question to the many authors who rely on closing with this ineffectual and weakening phrase and to all editors who allow its persistence: what precisely does it mean to interpret with caution? There is no standard by which the reader can know how to interpret the results with caution and furthermore, how to modify future decisions (either in clinical practice or for future research) based on this universal warning. Of course, to interpret results with caution means, the authors claim that, though the methods are valid, they are based on some moderately unsound principles or assumptions. There is nothing inherently wrong with this, as the warning to interpret with caution is nearly always coupled with reasons why. (Those that close with this phrase but without qualification are especially egregious in giving their open-ended warning.) However, these reasons are different within every publication despite that the exact same warning is given again and again. This phrase has been so overused that it has truly lost its function and moreover its meaning. I contend that if the burden of final interpretation lies with the reader (as is certainly the case), the phrase “interpreted with caution” ought to be dropped altogether. If reasons are provided for limitations or stretches in logical steps, then this is sufficient for any reader to make his or her interpretation, because ultimately, to “interpret with caution” is an ambiguous undertaking.

### **2. "This study didn’t take (x minor variable) into account."**

If someone makes this claim, they’re making a positive statement. In order for a study to have a statistically significant variable, they need to have a very low p-value which means that there’s usually a low 5% probability we would have gotten the data that we did randomly if the null hypothesis was true i.e “there’s no discrimination”. To prescribe the not controlled variable as an explanatory variable, they’d have to establish a link to disparate outcomes. Anything could theoretically account for a disparity in multivariate regression, unobserved or not, but unless the counter explanation is backed up, we still say the racial discrimination hypothesis is consistent. So they’d have to do a few things:
- Prove the not controlled variable is not independent.
- Prove how the not controlled variable has a significant effect.
- Prove how black people disproportionately engage in the not controlled variable.
- Prove how black people disproportionately engage in the not controlled variable that would account for all of the disparity.
- Prove how the not controlled variable correlates with the dependent variable to the point it suggests it is causal.
- Prove how the not controlled variable correlates with at least one independent variable in the regression.
  - Even if you do include it into the regression the results could still indicate that the omitted variable and race can still be statistically significant with a positive correlation.
- Prove how the residuals in the models violated the OLS assumptions and Guass-Markov theorem then reduces the goodness-of-fit from larger residuals and biased the coefficient estimates.
- Prove coefficients change if you include different combinations of independent variables in the model.
- Prove how the coefficients are precise by tracking the precision through confidence intervals and coefficient estimates.
- Prove how when including the confounded invariably doesn’t introduce multicollinearity in the model.

Systemic racism is a field of study that uses inductive reasoning. Including too many variables in a model can lead to [overfitting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overfitting "overfitting") which can produce biased results. In disparate impact testing, the primary statistical concern is most often “included variable bias” – the worry that the statistical estimates of disparate impact are biased because the regression inappropriately includes non-race variables.